K 

^  '^ 

t  « 

w  . 

'-<  t 

<  ^ 

►J  _• 

o 

H  > 

J  . 

<  <5 

■■/■-  ■•5 

o  o 

Z.  ~ 

■—  >i 

Q  " 

a  CO 


3  -c 
"^   is 


.01.*  LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


BIO^IJAPyKAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


A  Compilation  of  Biographical  Sketches  of  Prominent 

Men  and  Women  in  the  Church  of  Jesus 

Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints 


BY 


ANDREW  JENSON, 

Assistant    Church    Historian' 


VOLUME  IV 


Exact  photo  reproduction  reprinted  in  1971  by  Western  Epics, 
254  South  Main,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah  84101 

Originally  published  by  the  Andrew  Jensen 
Memorial  Association  in   1936 


t  ithoGRapmED  " 


PUBLISHERS  PRESS 

SALT  LAKE  CITY   UTAH 


THE  LIBRARY 

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITT 

PROVO,  UTAH 


PREFACE 


When  the  publication  of  the  Latter-day  Saint  Biographi- 
cal Encyclopedia  was  commenced  in  1901,  it  was  the  intention 
to  confine  the  scope  of  its  contents  to  the  Nineteenth  Cen- 
tury, but,  as  the  Church  grew  and  its  organizations  and 
members  multiplied,  it  was  concluded  to  cover  the  first 
hundred  years  of  the  existence  of  the  Church,  beginning  with 
1830  and  ending  with  1930.  With  this  object  in  view,  two 
other  volumes  of  the  Encyclopedia  were  published.  Vol,  2  in 
1914  and  Vol.  3  in  1920. 

In  the  mean  time  the  collection  of  life  stories  of  leading 
men  and  women  in  the  Church  had  been  continued  until  there 
were  upwards  of  15,000  of  these  sketches  on  hand.  This 
included  at  least  one-half  of  the  Bishops  and  other  presiding 
officers  who  had  figured  prominently  in  the  affairs  of  the 
Church  both  in  the  organized  Stakes  of  Zion  and  in  the 
missionary  fields.  Hence,  with  the  approval  of  the  First 
Presidency  of  the  Church,  it  was  decided  to  publish  one  more 
volume,  in  order  to  make  the  circle  of  information  more 
nearly  complete,  and  with  this  aim  in  mind  the  present  book. 
Volume  IV  of  the  L.  D.  S.  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  is  now 
being  issued. 

Many  of  the  brief  outlines  contained  in  Volume  IV  are 
based  on  more  detailed  manuscript  biographies  which,  if 
published  in  full,  would  at  least  fill  a  dozen  books.  As  it  is, 
the  four  volumes  now  published  might  consistently  be  named 
a  "Who's  Who"  in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints,  thus  paraphrasing  the  "Who's  Who  in  America"  in 
a  general  way. 

When  a  copy  of  Volume  IV  shall  have  been  placed  in 
every  stake,  ward,  mission  and  district  throughout  the 
Church,  considering  the  fact  that  only  2,000  copies  are 
printed,  there  will  only  be  books  enough  left  to  accommodate 
those  who  possess  Volumes  I,  II,  and  III.  A  carefully  pre- 
pared index,  attached  to  Volume  IV,  will  enable  the  student 
to  find  anything  contained  in  all  the  four  books  of  the  En- 
cyclopedia. 


IV  PREFACE 

To  all  who  have  given  us  encouragement,  or  rendered 
assistance  in  our  onerous  labors  of  love,  covering  nearly  a 
lifetime,  we  render  sincere  thanks,  and  it  is  now  our  pleasure 
to  dedicate  the  Latter-day  Saint  Biographical  Encyclopedia 
in  its  entirety  to  all  students  of  Church  History  and 
Genealogy. 

ANDREW  JENSON. 


EXPLANATION  OF  ABREVIATIONS 

Alex. — Alexander 

Benj. — Benjamin 

Bio.  Ency. — Biographical  Encyclopedia 

Chas. — Charles 

Co.- — County 

Eph. — Ephraim 

Fred. — Frederick 

Geo. — George 

jun. — junior 

L.  D.  S. — Latter-day  Saints 

M.  I.  A. — Mutual  Improvement  Association 

Pres. — President 

Sam. — Samuel 

sen. — senior 

Theo.— Theodore 

Thos.— Thomas 

"Valley"— Great  Salt  Lake  Valley 

Vol.— Volume 

Wm. — William 

Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. — Young  Ladies  Mutual  Improvement  Association 

Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. — Young  Men's  Mutual  Improvement  Association 

Y.  W.  M.  I.  A. — Young  Woman's  Mutual  Improvement  Association 

+  ,  as  in  1930 +  ,  signifies  an  additional  but  indefinite  period. 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 

Biographical  Encyclopedia 


ANDERSON,  Daniel,  first  Bishop 
of  the  Moroni  East  Ward,  Moroni 
Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
March  28,  1866,  in  Aiken,  Veile  Amt, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Niels  J.  Ander- 
sen and  Karen  Marie  Nielsen.  He 
emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Utah 
in  1872  and  located  at  Moroni,  where 
he  has  resided  ever  since.  There  he 
was  baptized  Sept.  13,  1874,  by  John 
Blackham,  and  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Teacher,  Priest  and 
Elder.  In  September,  1886,  he  mar- 
ried Violet  Cloward  in  the  Logan 
Temple.  The  children  of  this  union 
are  Mary  C,  Addie  (deceased),  Raphel, 


Daniel  J.,  Dora  and  Vivian.  Brother 
Anderson  filled  a  mission  to  Norway 
in  1904,  laboring  in  the  Christiania 
Conference,  part  of  the  time  as  pres- 
ident of  the  Fredrikshald  Branch.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Jacob  H. 
Jensen,  July  9,  1905,  and  acted  for 
several    years    as    a   president   of   the 


37th  quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1907- 
1908  he  filled  another  mission,  this 
timo  to  the  Northern  States,  during 
which  he  acted  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  St.  Paul  (Minnesota) 
Branch.  On  this  second  mission  he 
was  accompanied  by  his  wife.  After 
returning  from  this  mission,  he  acted 
as  a  stake  Sunday  school  officer,  and 
on  Dec.  12,  1914,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Apostle  George  F. 
Richards  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Orlando  Bradley  of 
Moroni.  He  acted  in  that  capacity 
until  Dec.  19,  1920,  when  Moroni  was 
divided  into  two  wards,  and  Elder 
Anderson  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Moroni  East  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  April, 
1928.  He  is  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  at  present.  Brother  Anderson 
is  a  farmer  by  avocation,  and  a  leading 
citizen  of  the  community  in  which  he 
resides. 

ANDERSON,  James  Henry,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  in  the  Ensign  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  Feb.  11,  1857,  the  son  of  James 
Anderson  and  Catharine  Mary  Cowley. 
His  early  school  training  was  by  his 
mother,  and  in  the  district  schools.  In 
1869  and  1870  he  was  a  student  at  the 
Deseret  University.  Leaving  that  in- 
stitution inl871  he  entered  the  employ 
of  the  "Deseret  News."  He  served  an 
apprenticeship  in  the  composing  de- 
partments and  became  an  expert  book 
and  job  printer.  In  1877  he  was  asso- 
ciated with  John  E.  Callister  and 
Emmett  D.  Mousley  in  starting  the 
Star  Printing  Office,  withdrawing  in 
October  of  that  year  to  become  the 
foreman  of  the  "Deseret  News"  book 


Vol.   IV,   No.   1 


Jamiarv.   lOS? 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  job  printing  departments.  He 
acted  in  that  position  over  seven 
years,  during  which  period  many  im- 
portant publications  in  English  and 
other  languages  were  printed  under 
his  supervision.  In  February,  1885, 
he  was  made  city  editor  of  the  "Des- 
eret  News,"  which  position  he  filled 
with  marked  success  until  August, 
1890,  when  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  Europe.  His  services  in  the  local 
department  of  the  "Deseret  News" 
editorial  work  covered  most  of  the 
period  of  anti-"Mormon"  prosecution 
under    the    Edmunds    and    Edmunds- 


Tucker  laws,  and  gave  to  him  valuable 
experience. 

On  his  return  from  Europe  in  1892 
he  was  associated  for  a  time  with 
Bishop  Orson  F.  Whitney,  on  Volume 
II  of  the  History  of  Utah,  and  in  the 
spring  of  1893  he  again  became  con- 
nected with  the  "Deseret  News"  edi- 
torial department.  While  there  he 
compiled  the  first  history  written  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  from  the  laying 
of  the  cornerstone  to  the  dedication  of 
the  completed  structure. 

This  history  appears  in  the  "Con- 
tributor" of  April,  1893  (Vol.  14). 

The  committee  on  admission  of 
Church  members  to  the  dedication  of 
the   Salt   Lake   Temple   from   April   6 


to  April  24,  1893,  were  John  Nicholson, 
Joseph  E.  Taylor,  and  James  H.  An- 
derson. The  Church  recommend  of 
each  individual  had  to  be  presented, 
and  the  apportionment  of  admissions 
regulated  for  each  session.  Elder 
Nicholson  was  clerk  of  the  conference 
and  Elder  Taylor  otherwise  engaged 
within  the  Temple.  This  left  the  task 
of  arranging  and  regulating  the  com- 
panies to  Elder  Anderson.  Under  his 
personal  direction  128,000  people 
passed  into  and  out  of  the  Temple 
during  the  dedicatory  exercises,  with- 
out confusion  or  mishap. 

From  1893  until  the  beginning  of 
1901  he  continued  with  the  "Deseret 
News,"  being  variously  engaged  in 
every  department  of  editorial  work. 
Jan.  4,  1901,  he  retired  from  the  "Des- 
eret News,"  and  on  Jan.  7,  1901,  as- 
sumed the  duties  of  county  commis- 
sioner in  Salt  Lake  County,  to  which 
position  he  had  been  elected  in  No- 
vember, 1900.  He  was  chosen  chairman 
of  the  board  of  county  commissioners. 
His  work  in  public  office  has  been 
characterized  by  the  same  faithful 
care  and  attention  that  were  given  his 
previous  labors.  Elder  Anderson  is  of 
a  thoughtful,  reserved  disposition,  not 
given  to  ostentation.  He  was  well 
trained  by  his  parents  in  temperate 
religious  habits,  and  followed  closely 
the  parental  instruction  and  example 
In  February,  1864,  he  united  with  the 
Sunday  School  in  the  Sixth  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  retained  his  member- 
ship to  1905,  being  a  diligent  worker 
in  the  Sunday  school  cause,  for  years 
past,  as  a  theological  class  teacher  and 
in  the  school  superintendency.  In 
1873  he  became  associated  with  mu- 
tual improvement  work  in  his  ward, 
and  has  shown  active  interest  therein 
ever  since.  At  the  age  of  eight  years, 
he  was  baptized  by  his  father.  In 
1871  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon,  two 
years  later  a  Priest,  and  on  Feb.  6, 
1876,  a  Seventy.  In  1881  he  married 
Mary  A.  Abbott,  a  native  of  Aber- 
gavenny, England.  In  1893  he  was 
chosen  one  of  the  seven  presidents  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


the  2nd  Quorum  of  Seventy,  and  when 
the  110th  Quoi-um  of  Seventy  was  or- 
j>anized  in  1897  he  was  chosen  its 
senior  president.  From  1875  to  1890 
he  acted  as  clerk  of  the  6th  Ward. 

Elder  Anderson  always  has  been 
energetic  in  his  efforts  to  promote  the 
dissemination  of  useful  knowledge.  In 
promulgating  the  principles  of  the 
Gospel  he  has  been  especially  active 
among  the  youth  residing  in  his  vicin- 
ity. In  the  autumn  of  1884  he  was 
called  to  labor  as  a  home  missionary 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  and 
until  his  release  in  1890  to  go  on  a 
foreign  mission,  he  kept  every  ap- 
pointment made  for  him.  In  Septem- 
ber, 1890,  he  went  to  Indian  Territory, 
visiting  at  Manard,  the  headquarters 
of  that  mission,  with  his  brother, 
Franklin  M.,  who  was  a  missionary  in 
that  field.  He  then  journeyed  to  Great 
Britain,  where  he  was  appointed  as  a 
traveling  Elder  in  the  London  con- 
ference. His  labors  there  were  in  the 
Kent,  Whitechapel  and  North  London 
districts.  In  December,  1890,  he  was 
called  to  Liverpool,  and  from  that  time 
until  his  return  home,  in  October,  1892, 
Elder  Anderson  conducted  the  editorial 
work  of  the  "Millennial  Star;"  he  also 
wrote  several  tracts,  and  spent  much 
of  his  time  in  traveling  and  preaching. 
Among  the  notable  addresses  given 
by  him  is  one  before  the  South  Place 
Ethical  Institute,  London,  on  "The 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day 
Saints,  its  History,  Mission  and  Des- 
tiny." He  visited  every  conference  in 
the  British  Mission,  and  in  July,  1892, 
made  a  trip  to  France. 

On  his  return  to  Utah  he  again  be- 
came a  home  missionary  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  and  was  actively 
engaged  till  a  long  and  severe  illness 
in  1898  necessitated  his  release.  Since 
1900,  when  his  health  improved,  he  has 
done  considerable  public  speaking, 
chiefly  on  historical  and  biblical  sub- 
jects. In  August,  1898,  he  accom- 
panied Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  on 
the  latter's  tour  of  the  Stakes  of  Zion 
in  central  and  southern  Utah. 


As  a  public  speaker.  Elder  Anderson 
is  clear,  earnest  and  logical.  The  same 
characteristics  mark  his  writings, 
most  of  which  consist  of  magazine  and 
newspaper  articles.  His  historical  and 
descriptive  sketch  of  the  Temple  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  first  published  in  "The 
Contributor"  in  1893,  is  recognized  as 
an  authoritative  statement  of  facts 
connected  with  the  building  of  that 
sacred  edifice. 

In  1902  James  H.  Anderson  was  re- 
elected commissioner  of  Salt  Lake 
County  and  retained  his  place  as  chair- 
man of  the  commission.  He  was  in- 
strumental in  the  institution  of  hard 
surface  roads  in  the  county  and  among 
the  first  to  install  street  lighting  con- 
veniences outside  of  cities.  He  plan- 
ned and  drew  up  the  law  forming 
county  school  districts,  which  law  was 
passed  by  the  Utah  Legislature  of 
1905,  and  went  into  effect  throughout 
the  State.  He  was  State  chairman  of 
the  Republican  party  in  Utah  when 
Reed  Smoot  was  elected  United  States 
senator.  In  February,  1903,  he  ac- 
companied Senator  Smoot  to  Wash- 
ington, and  as  a  contest  was  instituted 
against  Senator  Smoot,  Chairman  An- 
derson interviewed  President  Roosevelt 
and  the  leading  Republican  senators, 
explaining  to  them  the  situation.  He 
was  present  when  Senator  Smoot  was 
sworn  in  on  March  4,  1903.  An  inter- 
esting item  of  national  history  at  that 
time  and  which  was  a  topic  of  discus- 
sion with  reference  to  Senator  Smoot, 
was  that  the  senator  furnished  the 
one  senator  of  the  two-thirds  needed 
to  pass  the  Panama  treaty  which 
enabled  the  United  States  to  build  the 
Panama  Canal. 

In  March,  1903,  Chairman  Anderson 
returned  to  his  duties  on  the  Salt  Lake 
County  Commission.  In  December, 
1904,  he  returned  to  Washington  with 
Senator  Smoot,  and  took  an  active 
part  in  the  Senator's  behalf  until  the 
case  was  finally  and  favorably  dis- 
posed of  in  February,  1906.  His 
interest  in  Utah  politics,  especially  in 
connection  with  the  election  and  pres- 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ence  of  Senator  Smoot  in  the  U.  S. 
Senate,  continued  during  the  entire 
period  of  the  senator's  service.  His 
political  addresses  avoid  entirely  any 
personal  criticism  of  political  antag- 
onists. 

In  1907,  Elder  Anderson  was  made 
a  member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Young  Men's  Mutual  Improvement 
Associations  in  the  Church,  and  con- 
tinued in  that  position  for  upwards  of 
22  years.  He  also  continued  as  a 
Sunday  school  teacher,  as  teacher  in 
the  quorum  of  Seventy,  and  in  active 
public  service,  particularly  in  teaching 
the  Scriptures,  both  ancient  and  mod- 
ern. Nov.  23,  1929,  he  was  ordained 
to  the  office  of  High  Priest.  As  a 
ward  teacher  in  the  wards  where  he 
resided,  he  has  had,  up  |to  1931,  up- 
wards of  thirty  years  actual  service. 
In  his  public  appointments  as  speaker 
and  lecturer  on  religious  subjects — 
sometimes  to  exceed  100  in  a  year^up 
to  the  present  (1932)  he  has  never 
failed  to  fill  his  appointments.  His 
addresses  have  been  made  in  many  of 
the  States  of  the  Union  from  New 
York  to  California  and  in  Europe. 
Some  of  his  gospel  tracts  have  been 
translated  from  English  into  other 
languages,  including  German,  the 
Scandinavian  languages  and  Maori. 
His  later  works  have  included  manuals 
for  the  Mutual  Improvement  Asso- 
ciations, the  most  elaborate  of  these 
being  "Ten  Women  of  the  Olden  Days," 
')f  which  a  limited  special  edition  was 
issued  in  book  form,  and  copies  placed 
in  the  Congressional  Library  at  Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  the  Los  Angeles  Public 
Library,  and  other  public  libraries. 
His  historical  lectures  on  Biblical  his- 
tory and  prophecy  are  notable  for  hav- 
ing included  up-to-date  fulfilment  of 
prophecies.  In  preparing  missionaries 
for  work  in  their  fields  of  labor,  he  is 
one  of  those  engaged  in  that  service 
at  the  Church  Missionary  Home  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  He  also  is  one  of 
the  founders  of  the  Utah  Genealogical 
Society,  and  a  member  of  the  Institute 
of  American  Genealogy  and  of  othei 


genealogical  societies  in  the  United 
States,  as  well  as  of  still  other  so- 
cieties in  Amei-ica  and  Europe  engaged 
in  gathering  genealogical  and  histor- 
ical information,  of  which  he  is  a  close 
student. 

In  1906,  he  was  made  chief  deputy 
U.  S.  Internal  Revenue  Collector 
of  the  District  of  Montana,  embracing 
the  States  of  Montana,  Utah,  and 
Idaho,  under  Collector  Edward  H.  Cal- 
lister,  and  continued  in  that  position 
until  1909,  when  President  Wm.  H. 
Taft  appointed  him  United  States 
Marshal  for  the  district  of  Utah.  His 
wife,  Mary  A.,  died  in  1903,  and  in 
December,  1904,  he  married  Elise  S. 
Schneider,  daughter  of  Christian 
Schneider  and  Susannah  Klosner.  At 
the  close  of  his  term  as  United  States 
Marshal,  in  1914,  his  wife  Elise  died. 
His  wife  Mary  A.  had  five  children, 
two  sons  and  three  daughters.  The 
two  sons,  Edgar  J.  and  Albert  H., 
died,  and  are  buried  at  Salt  Lake  City. 
The  three  daughters,  Florence  M. 
Horsley,  Mabel  E.  Moore  and  Dessie 
M.  Anderson  still  live;  also  two  grand- 
children; one  grandchild  is  June  An- 
derson Moore,  daughter  of  Mabel.  His 
wife  Elise  left  two  daughters,  twins, 
Alta  E.  Baldwin  and  Ellen  E.  Ander- 
son of  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  One 
grandchild  is  Alta's  son,  Theodore  N. 
Baldwin.  Ellen's  daughter,  Barbara 
May,  died,  and  is  buried  at  Salt  Lake 
City. 

In  July,  1921,  President  Harding  ap- 
pointed James  H.  Anderson  as  United 
States  Collector  of  Internal  Revenue 
for  the  district  of  Utah,  and  he  has 
continued  to  hold  that  position  under 
Presidents  Coolidge  and  Hoover.  He 
is  active  in  all  his  duties,  State, 
Church,  and  educational. 

ANDERSON.  John  Forbes,  Patri- 
arch in  the  Alberta  Stake,  Alberta. 
Canada,  was  born  April  4,  1863,  in 
Woodside,  Aberdeenshire,  Scotland, 
the  son  of  John  Anderson  and  Cather- 
ine Smith.  Being  of  a  religious  turn 
of   mind,   he   attended    Sunday    school 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


in  the  Presbyterian  Church,  to  which 
his  parents  belonged;  and  becoming 
a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  he  was  bap- 
tized by  Hugh  Findlay,  Jan.  3,  1879. 
Soon  afterwards  he  was  oxxlained  a 
Teacher  and  commenced  his  labors  in 
that  capacity  among  the  Saints  in  the 
Aberdeen  Branch.  In  1880  he  was 
ordained  a  Priest,  after  which  he  did 
considerable  local  missionary  labor 
which  he  enjoyed.  In  the  meantime, 
his  mother  and  the  rest  of  the  family, 
except  the  father,  joined  the  Church 
and  emigrated  to  Zion.  Brother  An- 
derson himself  emigrated  to  Utah  in 


1882,  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the 
steamship  "Nevada,"  and  on  Oct.  9, 
1882,  he  married  Mary  Ann  Ross,  a 
girl  who  had  been  driven  away  from 
her  home  in  Scotland  because  of  her 
acceptance  of  the  gospel.  For  a  num- 
ber of  years  Elder  Anderson  was  en- 
gaged in  quarrying  stone  for  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple  in  Little  Cottonwood 
Canyon.  While  residing  in  Spanish 
Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  he  took  an 
active  pai't  in  Sunday  school  and  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  work.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Andrew  Ferguson  and  be- 
came a  member  of  the  50th  quorum  of 
Seventy.  In  1889  he  moved  to  Sco- 
field.  Carbon  Co.,  Utah,  where  he  acted 
as  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as 


a  Sunday  school  and  ward  teacher. 
There  also  he  had  a  narrow  escape 
from  being  killed  in  a  mining  explo- 
sion. Recording  his  experiences  in  life, 
he  refers  to  a  number  of  other  instanc- 
es where  his  life  was  saved  almost  in  a 
miraculous  manner.  His  next  move 
was  to  Grass  Valley,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah, 
where  he  spent  eight  years  endeavor- 
ing to  build  up  pioneer  settlements. 
At  Burrville  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  acted  as  a  counselor  to 
Bishop  Henry  Teeples  of  the  Burrville 
Ward.  Later  he  succeeded  Bishop 
Teeples  as  Bishop  of  said  ward,  being 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Anthon  H.  Lund, 
Dec.  29,  1900.  He  held  that  position 
until  he  left  for  Canada  in  1902.  At 
Raymond,  Alberta,  Canada,  he  was 
employed  by  the  Knight  Sugar  Com- 
pany to  lay  the  foundation  for  the 
Raymond  Flouring  Mill,  and  later 
of  the  Knight  Sugar  Factory.  When 
the  Taylor  Stake  was  organized  Sept. 
2,  1903,  he  was  chosen  to  preside  as 
Bishop  of  the  Raymond  Ward,  which 
labor  he  enjoyed  immensely.  When 
the  Raymond  Ward  was  divided  into 
two  wards  in  1912,  Brother  Anderson 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Raymond 
1st  Ward.  This  position  he  held  until 
March,  1915,  when  he  moved  to  Card- 
ston,  where  he  took  an  active  part  in 
the  erection  of  the  Temple,  as  a  me- 
chanic. In  1915  he  was  privileged  as 
the  master  mason  to  lay  the  corner- 
stone of  the  Alberta  Temple.  In  1919- 
1920  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  the  City 
of  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa.  After  return- 
ing home  he  was  set  apart  by  Apostle 
George  F.  Richards  to  act  as  one  of 
the  presidency  of  the  High  Priests 
quorum,  May  9,  1921;  and  on  May  3, 
1923,  Apostle  Richards  ordained  him 
a  Patriarch.  In  1923  he  was  called 
and  set  apart,  together  with  his  wife, 
as  ordinance  workers  in  the  Alberta 
Temple.  Brother  Anderson  finishes 
his  narrative  by  saying,  "This  is  the 
greatest  calling  which  has  come  to  us, 
and  which  we  still  enjoy,  hoping  that 
we  may  die  in  the  harness  and  receive 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


a  heavenly  welcome  from  our  many 
friends  in  whose  behalf  we  have 
labored." 

ANDRUS.  Joseph  Boyes,  fifth  Bish- 
op of  Marion  Ward,  Summit  Co., 
Utah,  was  born  March  6,  1885,  at 
Big  Cottonwood,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Milo  Andrus,  jun.,  and 
Elizabeth  Boyes.  He  was  raised  in 
Big  Cottonwood  and  there  received  a 
common  school  education;  later  he 
became  a  student  at  the  L.  D.  S.  Uni- 
versity in  Salt  Lake  City  and  later 
at  the  University  of  Utah.  He  was 
baptized  March  30,  1893,  by  William 
Bowthorpe  and  confirmed  by  Santa 
Ana  Casto.  From  his  earliest  youth 
he  was  taught  the  principles  of  the 
gospel  and  became  an  active  Church 
worker.  Thus,  he  was  ordained  a 
Deacon,  March  15,  1897,  by  Milo 
Andrus,  jun.;  a  Teacher,  Nov.  10,  1902 
by  Milo  Andrus,  jun.;  a  Priest,  July 
13,  1903,  by  Santa  Ana  Casto,  and  an 
Elder,  Feb.  3,  1908,  by  Ensign  Wood- 
ruff. While  advancing  in  the  order  of 
the  Priesthood,  he  acted  as  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  a  Deacons  quo- 
rum and  was  also  president  of  a 
Teachers  quorum  and  a  counselor  in 
an  Elders  quorum  in  Big  Cottonwood. 
He  also  took  an  active  part  in  M.  L  A. 
work.  In  1915  he  moved  to  Marion, 
Summit  Co.,  Utah,  where  he  con- 
tinued his  Church  activities  as  a  ward 
teacher,  Sunday  school  teacher,  etc. 
In  1908  (Dec.  23rd)  he  married  Har- 
riet E.  Stevenson  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  six  children,  namely,  Jos- 
eph Wesley,  Theron  Roscoe,  Millard 
Arvvin,  Ida,  lona  and  Ruth.  Bro. 
Andrus  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  25,  191  «>,  by  Moses  W.  Taylor 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  G,  1916, 
by  James  E.  Talmage  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Marion  Ward. 
This  position  he  still  holds.  He  is  a 
farmer  and  stockraiser  by  avocation 
and  among  the  numerous  positions  he 
has  filled  in  a  civil  capacity  may  be 
mentioned    his    service    since    1918    as 


a  member  of  the  South  Summit  School 
Board.  Bishop  Andrus  is  known  uni- 
versally for  his  faithfulness  as  a 
Church  member,  his  compliance  with 
the  counsels  of  the  authorities  of  the 
Church  and  his  characteristics  as  an 
honest,  upright  citizen. 

ANDRUS.  Millard  Burgess,  sixth 
Bishop  of  the  Draper  Ward,  Jordan 
Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  22,  1879,  at  Draper,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Millard  Andrus 
and  Minerva  Deseret  Terry.  He  was 
raised  in  Draper,  where  he  received 
a  common  school  education,  and  was 
later  a  student  for  two  years  in  the 
University  of  Utah.  After  being  bap- 
tized by  Joseph  M.  Smith,  when  eight 
years  old,  he  was  ordained  success- 
ively to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher 
and  Priest.  He  acted  as  president 
of  a  Deacons  quorum  and  later  as 
liresident  of  a  Teachers  quorum.  Af- 
ter being  ordained  an  Elder  by  John 
Heber  Garfield  at  Draper,  March  14, 
1901,  he  acted  as  first  counselor  to 
John  H.  Garfield  in  the  presidency  of 
the  5th  quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Jor- 
dan Stake.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty March  31,  1903,  by  Rulon  S. 
Wells  and  filled  a  mission  to  Switzer- 
land, Austria  and  Germany  in  1903- 
1905.  On  this  mission  he  had  many 
interesting  experiences  and  was  sub- 
ject to  considerable  persecution.  He 
was  one  of  the  first  L.  D.  S.  mission- 
aries in  the  province  of  Anholt  in 
Prussia  and  presided  afterwards  over 
a  branch  of  the  Church  at  Gera  in 
the  province  of  Reuss.  After  his 
return  home,  he  acted  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary in  the  Jordan  Stake  and  as 
second  assistant  stake  superintendent 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Jordan  Stake. 
Later  he  acted  as  first  counselor  in 
the  same  stake  organization.  After  that 
he  presided  over  the  Draper  Sunday 
school  four  years,  and  for  a  number 
of  years  served  as  a  president  of  the 
73rd  Quorum  of  Seventy.  Being  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Sept.  13,  1914, 
by    Orson    F.    Whitney,    he    acted    as 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


first  counselor  to  Bishop  Peter  C. 
Rasmussen.  After  filling  that  posi- 
tion four  years,  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  Oct.  11, 
1918,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Draper  Ward,  which  position  he  oc- 
cupied until  May  28,  1927.  In  1908 
(Sept.  3rd),  he  married  Mary  Mickel- 
sen  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  This 
union  has  been  blessed  with  four  chil- 
dren, namely,  Neil  Millard  (deceased). 
Bertha  Minerva,  Mary  Edith  (de- 
ceased), and  Belva.  Bishop  Andrus 
is  a  farmer  by  occupation,  and  he  has 
filled  a  number  of  civil  and  political 
offices.  Thus  he  served  as  a  member 
of  the  Utah  State  Legislature  in  1923- 
1924,  chairman  of  the  Republican  Club 
at  Draper  and  a  member  of  the  Salt 
Lake  County  Civic  Club.  Bishop  An- 
drus is  a  man  of  affairs  and  takes  a 
leading  part  in  all  matters  pertaining 
to  the  progress  and  benefit  of  the 
community  in  which  he  resides.  While 
on  his  mission  in  Germany  he  ac- 
quired the  German  language  to  a 
remarkable  degree  of  perfection. 

ASHTON,  Edward  Morris,  presi- 
dent of  the  High  Priests  Quorum  of 
Liberty  Stake,  was  born  Jan.  12,  1879, 
in  .Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Edward  T.  Ashton  and  Effie  Morris. 
He  was  baptized  when  8  years  of  age 
by  Wm.  Binder  and  later  was  or- 
dained to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher  and  Priest.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  1898,  when  only 
19  years  of  age  by  George  Albert 
Smith  and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Germany,  where  he  served  with  great 
fidelity  for  over  three  years.  In  1902 
(Oct.  15th),  Bro.  Ashton  married 
Louise  Badger  (daughter  of  Rodney 
C.  Badger  and  Louise  Ashby),  to 
whom  were  born  seven  children, 
namely,  Morris  B.,  Virginia  L.,  Beat- 
rice, Richard  E.,  David  B.,  John  H., 
and  Mary  Ruth. 

On  Oct.  1,  1911,  Elder  Ashton  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
Apostle  Anthon  H.  Lund  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  31st  Ward  of  the 


Liberty  Stake.  When  this  ward  was 
divided  and  the  east  part  organized 
as  the  Le  Grand  Ward,  Bishop  Ash- 
ton became  Bishop  of  that  ward,  to 
which  position  he  was  set  apart  Sept. 
7,  1913.  In  1924  the  east  part  of  the 
Le  Grand  Ward  was  organized  as 
the  Yale  Ward  and  Bishop  Ashton 
was  called  to  preside  over  that  wai'd, 
to  which  position  he  was  set  apart 
Feb.  17,  1924.  He  served  in  this 
capacity  until  he  had  supervised  the 
erection  of  a  fine,  modern  chapel, 
when  he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  Liberty  Stake, 
and  in  1930  became  president  of  the 


High    Priests   quorum   of   the   Liberty 
Stake. 

In  a  civil  capacity  Bishop  Ashton 
has  acted  as  pi-esident  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Chamber  of  Commerce,  member 
of  the  U.  S.  Chamber  of  Commerce, 
president  of  the  Salt  Lake  Real  Estate 
Board,  of  the  Utah  State  Real  Estate 
Board  and  of  the  Utah  Mortgage 
Banks  Association;  also  as  vice-pres- 
ident of  the  National  Real  Estate  Board 
and  member  of  the  Salt  Lake  City 
Planning  Commission.  He  is  primar- 
ily interested  in  the  development  of 
the  city's  better  residential  districts 
and  is  vice-president  of  Ashton-Jen- 
kins    Company,    manager    of    a    large 


8 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


mortgage  business  in  connection 
therewith  and  in  the  same  connection, 
correspondent  of  the  Equitable  Life 
Assurance  Society  of  the  United 
States  and  vice-president  of  four  local 
building  and  loan  societies.  He  was 
at  one  time  a  director  of  the  Utah 
Savings  and  Trust  Company  Bank. 
Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  Bishop  Ash- 
ton  is  an  asset  to  the  community  in 
commercial  and  civil  capacities,  while 
giving  liberally  of  his  time  and  talents 
to  his  ecclesiastical  duties.  Bishop 
Ashton  has  a  pleasing  personality  and 
commands  the  respect  of  his  asso- 
ciates everywhere. 

ASHTON,  George  Savage,  the  first 
Bishop  of  the  Capitol  Hill  Ward  (Salt 
Lake    Stake),    Salt   Lake    City,   Utah, 


was  born  July  27,  1870,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  the  son  of  Edward  Ashton  and 
Jane  Treharne.  He  was  baptized  July 
27,  1878,  by  his  father  in  the  Jordan 
River,  and  received  his  education  in 
the  public  schools  and  in  the  L.  D.  S. 
College  in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  by  Bishop  Joseph 
Pollard,  and  an  Elder  in  September, 
1893,  by  James  W.  Ure.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Oct.  [\  IHiVS,  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  set 
apart    for    a    mission    to    the    Indian 


Territory,  where  he  labored  for  22 
months  in  the  Oklahoma  Conference 
and  six  months  as  president  of  the 
Cherokee  Conference.  After  return- 
ing home,  he  labored  as  an  officer  in 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  15th  Ward. 
When  the  24th  Ward  was  created  out 
of  the  western  part  of  the  15th  Ward 
he  became  choir  leader,  in  which  po- 
sition he  served  six  years  and  he  also 
labored  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Before 
going  on  his  mission  he  married  Leah 
Fidkin  (a  daughter  of  William  Fidkin 
and  Alice  Crowton)  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  Sept.  21,  1893.  She  was  born 
Feb.  27,  1872,  in  England  and  came 
to  Utah  with  her  parents  in  1874.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  eight 
children,  namely,  Leah  F.,  George  W., 
Lucile  Fidkin,  Aliene  F.,  Emma  F., 
William  ¥.,  Melvin  Alma  and  Reed 
Earl.  Brother  Ashton  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  19,  1904,  by  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  set  apart  as  2nd 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  W.  Boud  of 
the  15th  Ward.  This  position  he  held 
for  sixteen  years,  when  he  was  called 
to  act  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake.  In  1920  he  moved  to 
the  19th  Ward,  and  when  the  Capitol 
Hill  Ward  was  organized  from  a  part 
of  the  19th  Ward,  Bro.  Ashton  became 
a  member  of  that  ward;  and,  being- 
called  to  preside  over  the  same,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  April  19,  1925, 
by  Apostle  Richard  R.  Lyman.  Under 
his  administration,  one  of  the  finest 
meeting  houses  in  the  Church  has  been 
erected  in  the  Capitol  Hill  Ward. 

Bishop  Ashton,  whose  chief  avoca- 
tion is  that  of  a  contractor  and  builder, 
was  honorably  released  as  Bishop  of 
the  Capitol  Hill  Ward  Dec.  28,  1930, 
since  which  time  he  has  acted  as  a 
member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  High 
Council. 

AYLETT,  John  Argent,  first  cmn- 
selor  in  the  presidency  of  the  East 
Jordan  Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah, 
was  born  Sept.  28,  1868,  at  West  Jor- 
dan, Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
William  Aylett  and  Hannah  Argent. 
He    was    raised    and    educated    in    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


9 


West  Jordan  Ward  and  ever  since  his 
baptism  on  June  6,  1878,  by  James 
Glover,  in  West  Jordan,  he  has  taken 
an  active  part  in  Church  affairs  and 
was  ordained  successively  to  the  of- 
ices  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  John  A. 
Egbert,  June  6,  1896;  a  Seventy,  June 
15,  1898,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  and 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  30, 
1915,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  pre- 
sided as  Bishop  of  the  Midvale  Ward 
until  May  8,  1927,  when  the  East 
Jordan  Stake  of  Zion  was  organized. 
On  that  occasion  he  was  released  as 
Bishop  of  the  Midvale  Ward  and 
chosen  as  first  counselor  to  Heber  J. 
Burgon  in  the  presidency  of  the  East 
Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  a  position  which 
he  still  occupies.  Bro.  Aylett  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northex'n  States  in 
1898-1900,  laboring  principally  in 
Missouri,  where  he  acted  as  counselor 
to  a  conference  president.  In  West 
Jordan  Ward  he  acted  for  a  number  of 
years  as  superintendent  of  the  Ward 
Sunday  school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
After  moving  to  Midvale,  he  acted  as 
an  assistant  Sunday  school  superin- 
tendent in  the  Jordan  Stake  and  later 
as  stake  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  which  position  he  held  until  he 
was  made  Bishop.  In  1889  (April 
27th)  he  mai-ried  Martha  Ann  Egbert 
of  West  Jordan  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple, which  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  four  children,  namely.  Vera 
Aleta,  John  Hollis,  Kelvin  William 
and  Mattie  Lorene.  Bro.  Aylett,  after 
becoming  a  resident  of  Midvale  in 
1910,  acted  for  several  years  as  mayor 
of  the  city  of  Midvale.  Being  held 
in  high  esteem  by  his  fellow  citizens, 
he  has  filled  many  other  positions  of 
responsibility  in  the  communities  in 
which  he  has  resided. 

After  returning  from  his  mission  in 
1900,  he  engaged  in  the  flour  milling 
business  with  the  Archibald  Gardner 
Mill,  now  the  West  Jordan  Milling 
Company,  located  in  West  Jordan 
Ward  on  the  Bingham  Highway,  west 
of  the  Jordan  River.     Bro.  Aylett  has 


been  there  continuously  since  1900 
and  has  acted  as  manager  of  said 
company  for  the  past  15  years.  He 
has  also  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Jordan  School  District  Board  two 
years  and  as  director  of  the  Midvale 
State  Bank,  which  position  he  still 
holds.  For  a  number  of  years  he 
labored  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Jordan   Stake. 

BAGNALL,    Joseph    Frobisher,    5th 

Bishop  of  the  Chester  Ward,  Moroni 
Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  22,  1870,  in  Moroni,  Sanpete  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Bagnall  and 
Sarah  Ann  Frobisher.  He  was  raised 
and  educated  in  Chester  and  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  7,  1879,  by  his  father. 
Being  raised  in  the  fear  and  admoni- 
tion of  the  Lord  by  goodly  parents, 
he  took  an  active  part  in  Church  af- 
fairs from  the  beginning,  and  while 
yet  quite  young  was  ordained  to  the 
lesser  Priesthood.  A  number  of  his 
boyhood  years  were  spent  with  sheep 
on  the  range.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1909-1911,  laboring  in  the 
Manchester  Conference,  part  of  the 
time  as  president  of  the  Rochdale 
Branch  and  later  as  president  of  the 
Hyde  Bx-anch.  After  his  return  home 
from  that  mission,  he  resumed  his 
local  Church  activities,  and  on  April 
28,  1912,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Peter  Mattson  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Wilford 
L.  Allred  of  the  Chester  Ward.  He 
held  that  position  until  Dec.  13,  1915. 
On  Dec.  14,  1924,  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Chester  Ward,  which  position  he  still 
occupies.  Brother  Bagnall  married 
Hannah  Christensen  of  Chester,  Dec. 
1,  1897,  which  union  was  blessed  with 
one  child,  Joseph  Rodley.  Besides 
him  the  Bishop  adopted  and  raised 
another  child  (Jean  Morrison).  Aside 
from  being  active  in  Church  affairs. 
Bishop  Bagnall  has  occupied  positions 
of  honor  and  responsibility  of  a  sec- 


10 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ular  nature;  thus  he  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Utah  State  Legislature 
(House)  in  1923-1925.  Brother  Bag- 
nail's  avocation  is  that  of  a  farmer 
and  a  stock-raiser. 

BANGERTER,  William  Henry,  3rd 

Bishop  of  the  Granger  Ward,  Oquirrh 
Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
June  29,  1890,  at  South  Jordan,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Frederick 
Lorenzo  Bangerter  and  Alice  Mary 
Blauer.  When  two  years  old  he 
7noved   with   his   parents   to   Granger, 


where  he  was  raised  and  educated,  and 
on  Aug.  7,  1898,  he  was  baptized  by 
Fred  L.  Bangerter.  He  was  ordained 
a  Deacon  when  12  years  old  and  acted 
as  a  counselor  in  the  presidency  of  a 
Deacons  Quorum.  At  the  age  of 
fifteen  he  was  ordained  a  Teacher 
and  acted  as  president  of  a  Teachers 
quorum  for  three  years.  At  the  age 
of  eighteen  he  was  ordained  a  Priest 
and  acted  as  librarian  of  the  Granger 
Sunday  school.  After  being  ordained 
an  Elder  Jan.  8,  1912,  by  Fred  Nielsen, 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in 
1913-1914.  Being  released  because  of 
the  World  War,  he  finished  his  mission 
in  the  United  States  and  returned 
home   in   May,   1915.      While   in   Ger- 


many he  presided  over  the  branch  of 
the  Church  at  Bremen,  and  later  acted 
as  president  of  the  Hamburg  Branch. 
In  America  he  labored  in  Brooklyn. 
After  returning  home  he  acted  as  a 
counselor  in  an  Elders  quorum,  Sun- 
day school  teacher.  Ward  teacher, 
teacher  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Cottonwood  Stake;  also  as  president 
of  the  3rd  Quorum  of  Elders  in  said 
stake.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Dec.  12,  1920,  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Granger  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  occupies.  In  1916 
(April  26th),  he  married  Isabelle 
Bawden,  daughter  of  John  H.  Bawden 
and  Alice  J.  Freestone.  This  union 
has  been  blessed  with  nine  children, 
namely,  Sarah  Alice,  William  Grant, 
Samuel  B.,  Pauline,  Blauer  Lorenzo, 
Elsbeth,  Mary  Glenneth,  Marian  and 
Naomi.  Bishop  Bangerter  is  a  farmer 
and  mechanic  by  avocation. 

BARKER,     Joseph     Fredrick,     3rd 

Bishop  of  the  Ogden  8th  Ward,  Ogden 
Stake,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  19,  1885,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son 
of  George  S.  Barker  and  Alice  Whit- 
ney. He  was  raised  and  educated  in 
Ogden,  attended  college  in  Ogden  and 
later  night  school  in  the  Weber  Acad- 
emy, at  Ogden.  Being  born  of  Latter- 
day  Saint  parents,  he  was  baptized 
April  5,  1893,  by  his  father,  and,  tak- 
ing an  active  part  in  Church  aifairs 
from  his  early  youth,  he  was  ordained 
successively  to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Priest,  Elder,  High  Priest 
and  Bishop.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1906-1908,  laboring 
])rincipally  in  London  and  Bristol, 
part  of  the  time  as  clerk  of  the  Bristol 
Conference.  After  returning  home 
from  his  mission,  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
Mound  Fort  Ward,  and  later  held  the 
position  of  superintendent  of  the  10th 
Ward  Sunday  school  in  the  North 
Weber  Stake.  In  1910  (Dec.  21),  he 
married  Rosabel  Dee  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple;  two  children,  viz.,  Alice  Dee 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


11 


and  Mary  Dee,  have  blessed  this  union. 
After  his  marriage  Brother  Barker 
moved  into  the  Ogden  8th  Ward, 
vi'here  he  labored  as  ward  clerk  from 
1911  to  1912.  After  being  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  James  Taylor,  Jan.  2, 
1917.  he  served  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Wilford  W.  Rawson  until  1925, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
David  O.  McKay  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Ogden  8th  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  occupies.  Bish- 
op Barker  has  been  active  in  both 
ecclesiastical  and  secular  affairs  since 
his  early  youth  and  has  become  dis- 
tinguished as  a  leader  among  men. 
He  acted  as  secretary  and  treasurer 
of  the  Utah  Canning  Company,  and 
for  a  long  time  has  been  president  of 
the  Utah  Canneries  Association.  His 
administration  as  a  Bishop  has  been 
fraught  with  much  success  and  pros- 
perity to  his  ward,  and  he  possesses 
the  confidence  and  good  will  of  his  co- 
religionists and  fellow-c  i  t  i  z  e  n  s 
thrriughout. 

BAYLES,  Hanson  Durham,  Bishop 
of  the  Blanding  Ward,  San  Juan 
Stake,  San  Juan  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Oct.  20,  1883,  at  Bluff,  San  Juan  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Hanson  Bayles  and 
Mary  Ann  Durham.  He  was  raised 
and  schooled  at  Bluff  and  later  spent 
two  years  as  a  student  at  the  B.  Y. 
University  at  Provo.  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  28,  1892,  by  Benjamin  Pei-- 
kini^,  and  taking  an  active  part  in 
Church  matters  from  his  early  youth 
he  was  ordained  successively  to  the 
office  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and  Elder. 
After  filling  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1904-1907,  during  which  he 
labored  principally  in  South  Carolina, 
he  moved  to  Blanding,  Utah,  where 
he  acted  as  superintendent  of  the 
ward  Sunday  school,  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Oct.  25,  1909,  by  Wayne  H. 
Redd  and  acted  as  president  of  the 
I05th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  He  held  this 
position  until  Dec.  23,  1923,  when  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Wayne 
H.  Redd  and  acted  as  a  High  Coun- 


cilor in  the  San  Juan  Stake  until  Dec. 
2,  1928,  when  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Richard  R.  Lyman 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Blanding  Ward,  which  position  he  still 
occupies.  In  1915-1916  he  filled  a  short 
mission  to  the  Southern  States,  labor- 
ing in  North  Carolina.  In  1911  (Dec. 
20),  he  married  Caroline  Lyman  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  The  issue  of  this 
marriage  are  Reed  E.,  Carol,  Francis 
Lyman,  Margaret,  Mildred  (deceased), 
Marian,  Platte  D.,  and  Hanson.  Be- 
sides his  ecclesiastical  positions  Bish- 
op Bayles  has  occupied  a  number  of 
offices  of  a  secular  nature.  Thus  he  has 
served  as  president  of  the  Blanding 
Town  Board  since  Jan.  1,  1930,  and  is 
also  president  of  the  Blanding  Irriga- 
tion Company.  Bishop  Bayles  is  a 
man  of  affairs  and  exercises  a  uni- 
versal good  influence  both  in  ecclesi- 
astical and  secular  matters  in  the 
prosperous  town  of  Blanding. 

BENNION,  Harden,  first  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion,  from  1923  to  1929,  was 
born  Oct.  7,  1862,  in  Taylorsville,  Salt 
Lake  County,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Bennion  and  Esther  A.  Birch.  In  the 
fall  of  1868,  when  6  years  old,  he 
accompanied  his  parents  and  their 
three  other  sons  on  an  overland  jour- 
ney by  teams  to  West  Point,  a  village 
founded  by  Latter-day  Saints  on  the 
Muddy  in  southeastern  Nevada,  to 
which  place  the  family  had  been  called 
by  the  authorities  of  the  Church.  The 
following  5  years  were  spent  in  that 
locality  doing  pioneer  labors,  including 
the  handling  of  sheep  and  cattle  in- 
trusted to  the  care  of  the  Bennions 
by  their  neighbors.  The  herd-ground 
included  what  is  now  Long  Valley, 
Meadow  Valley,  Eagle  Valley  (now  in 
Nevada)  and  Desert  Spring,  near  Mo- 
dena,  Utah.  In  the  fall  of  1873,  the 
family  with  three  additional  members 
(Owen,  Willard  Richards  and  Ida) 
returned  to  the  old  home  at  Taylors- 
ville, but  the  following  year  Harden 
went  back  with  his  father  to  Panaca, 
Nevada,    and    drove    400    sheep    from 


12 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


there  to  Rush  Valley,  Tooele  Co.,  Utah, 
a  distance  of  300  miles.  In  the  spring 
of  1876  the  family  moved  to  Vernon, 
Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  which  became  their 
home  for  30  years  or  more.  Harden 
attended    district    schools   for   several 


years  during  the  winter  and  worked 
on  the  farm  in  the  spring  and  summer. 
He  also  herded  sheep  near  Vernon 
and  handled  ranch  cattle  as  occasion 
required.  In  October,  1878,  he  was 
appointed  to  the  normal  scholarship  at 
the  Deseret  University,  now  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah,  and  at  the  close  of 
the  school  year,  he  received  a  certifi- 
cate of  graduation  and  as  a  teacher. 
But  instead  of  teaching  school  he  went 
back  to  his  Vernon  home  and  for  seven 
years  worked  on  the  farm  or  herded 
sheep  in  the  mountains.  Later,  he 
accepted  a  clerical  position  in  the  office 
of  George  M.  Cannon,  then  recorder 
of  Salt  Lake  County,  where  he  worked 
until  May  31,  1893,  on  which  date 
he  married  Miss  Vilate  Kimball  Nebe- 
ker,  daughter  of  George  Nebeker  and 
Elizabeth  Dilworth,  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  After  his  marriage  he  was 
employed  by  the  Security  Abstract 
Company  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  later 
became  manager  of  the  Ashley  Coop- 
erative Mercantile  Institution  in  Ver- 
nal, Uintah  Co.,  Utah,  where  his  broth- 
er, Samuel  R.  Bennion,  acted  as  presi- 


dent of  the  Uintah  Stake  for  Id  years. 
During  this  time,  Harden  assisted  in 
the  organization  of  the  Bank  of  Vernal, 
of  which  he  was  made  director  and 
later  a  vice-president;  he  also  became 
a  stockholder  and  director  in  the  Ash- 
ley Cooperative  Mercantile  Institution. 
At  Vernal  he  acted  as  a  member  of 
the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  newly 
incorporated  town  of  Vernal,  and  also 
served  as  town  clerk.  Later,  when 
the  town  became  incorporated  as  a 
city,  he  acted  as  a  member  of  the  City 
Council.  He  also  served  as  postmaster 
at  Vernal,  and  in  November,  1898,  was 
elected  a  state  senator  to  the  Utah 
Legislature  from  the  counties  of  Uin- 
tah, Carbon,  Emery,  Grand  and  San 
Juan.  At  the  close  of  4  years  he 
was  reelected  in  1902  for  another  4- 
year  term  in  the  same  position.  While 
acting  in  this  capacity  he  was  appoint- 
ed by  Governor  Heber  M.  Wells  to 
serve  as  a  member  of  the  Utah  Arid 
Land  Reclamation  Company  Fund 
Commission,  which  position  he  held  for 
four  years.  After  terminating  his 
services  with  the  Ashley  Coop.  Mer- 
cantile Institution  in  the  spring  of 
1908,  he  devoted  his  time  and  attention 
to  ranching  and  live-stock  business, 
his  ranch  being  located  at  Leota  on 
Green  River,  about  25  miles  south  of 
Vernal.  While  thus  engaged  he  was, 
much  to  his  surprise,  appointed  by 
Governor  William  Spry  in  the  spring 
of  1909  to  serve  as  a  member  of  the 
Utah  State  Board  of  Equalization.  He 
acted  in  that  capacity  for  the  ensuing 
8  years,  with  the  exception  of  about 
10  months  of  the  years  1912-1913, 
during  which  time,  at  the  request  of 
the  governor,  he  acted  as  a  member 
of  the  Utah  Commission  on  Taxation 
and  Revenue.  In  the  fall  of  1916  he 
was  elected  secretary  of  State,  in 
which  capacity  he  served  until  the 
close  of  the  year  1920.  During  the 
succeeding  four  years  he  acted  as  of- 
fice manager  of  the  Salt  Lake  City 
ofi'ice  of  the  Provo  Reservoir  Company 
and  the  Utah  Lake  IiTigation  Com- 
pany, and  while  so  engaged  joined 
with  Joseph  R.  Murdock  (president  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


13 


said  company)  in  the  organization  of 
the  Wasatch  Livestock  Loan  Company, 
of  which  he  also  acted  as  secretary- 
treasurer,  and  as  a  member  of  the 
board  of  dii'ectors,  which  latter  po- 
sition he  held  until  1930. 

In  the  fall  of  1924  he  was  chosen 
as  state  chairman  of  the  Democratic 
State  Committee  and  acted  as  such 
through  the  campaign  of  that  year, 
with  the  result  that  George  H.  Dern, 
head  of  the  Democratic  ticket,  was 
elected  governor.  In  March,  1925, 
Harden  Bennion  was  appointed  Com- 
missioner of  Agriculture  and  served 
in  that  office  during  the  following 
four  years,  and  at  the  legislative  ses- 
sion of  the  year  1929,  he  was  elected 
to  the  same  office  and  served  for  an 
additional  term  of  four  years. 

Born  and  reared  a  member  of  the 
"Mormon"  Church  he  has  always  tak- 
en an  active  part  in  Church  affairs. 
He  was  baptized  by  his  father,  John 
Bennion,  when  he  was  about  eight 
years  of  age.  On  July  31,  1887,  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Lysander 
Gee.  Soon  after  his  removal  to  Vernal 
in  1893  he  was  made  president  of 
the  ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  in  Au- 
gust, 1898,  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  N.  Davis 
of  the  Vernal  Ward.  Later  he  acted 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Davis. 
When  the  Uintah  Stake  of  Zion  was 
re-organized  in  1906,  he  was  chosen  as 
a  member  of  the  stake  High  Council, 
and  later  became  first  counselor  to 
President  William  H.  Smart.  Follow- 
ing his  appointment  by  Gov.  Spry 
to  serve  on  the  State  Board  of  Equal- 
ization he  was  released  from  his  po- 
sition in  the  Uintah  Stake  presidency, 
and,  removing  to  Salt  Lake  City,  he 
served  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake.  Due  to 
his  financial  interests  in  the  Uintah 
country,  he  spent  part  of  his  time 
there,  and  while  looking  after  his 
interests  in  the  Uintah  Basin  he  was 
chosen  as  stake  clerk  of  the  Duchesne 
Stake  in  1914,  and  acted  in  this  ca- 
pacity for  a  period  of  two  years.  Due 
to  his   election   as   secretary  of   state 


in  the  fall  of  1916,  and  the  imperative 
demands  for  his  whole  time  in  that 
position,  he  was  released  from  his 
missionary  call  in  the  Uintah  country 
and  was  shortly  afterwards  chosen 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake,  which  position 
he  held  until  March  11,  1923,  when 
he  was  appointed  to  serve  as  first 
counselor  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Pres- 
idency. He  held  that  position  until 
June  16,  1929,  when  the  stake  presi- 
dency was  re-organized,  after  which 
Bro.  Bennion  again  became  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
His  marriage  with  Vilate  Kimball 
Nebeker  has  been  blessed  with  5  chil- 
dren, viz.,  Aurelia,  Ida,  Florence, 
Esther  and  Bernice.  With  the  excep- 
tion of  Ida,  who  died  in  infancy,  all 
these  children  have  been  educated  in 
the  district  and  high  schools  of  the 
state,  and  all  have  received  graduation 
degrees  from  the  University  of  Utah. 

BILLS,  David,  3rd  Bishop  of  the 
Riverton  Ward,  West  Jordan  Stake, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  April 
13,  1873,  at  South  Jordan,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wm.  A.  Bills 
and  Emmeline  Beckstead.  When  about 
eight  years  old  he  was  baptized  and 
later  ordained  to  offices  in  the  Priest- 
hood. As  a  Seventy  he  acted  as  one 
of  the  presidents  of  the  73rd  Quorum 
of  Seventy  and  was  superintendent  of 
a  Sunday  school  for  a  long  time,  hav- 
ing previously  acted  as  a  counselor  in 
the  Riverton  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
On  April  4,  1891,  he  married  Lorena 
Emmeline  Smith  (daughter  of  Lauritz 
Smith  and  Hannah  Jensen  of  Draper) 
who  has  borne  him  sixteen  children, 
namely,  David  Lauritz,  Luetta,  Lorena 
May,  Lancelot,  Sylvia,  Clarence  De- 
lurel,  Venice,  Ebba  Elenor,  Henry 
Locell,  Amelia,  Leo  De  Mont,  Kenneth, 
Melvarea,  Jessiemina,  Vaughn  Gor- 
don, and  Derrill  Smith.  David  L. 
died;  the  other  fifteen  are  still  liv- 
ing. One  son  and  one  daughter  have 
filled  missions  and  one  son  (Clarence 
D.)    holds    the    championship    of    the 


14 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Western  States  as  a  typist,  an  honor 
which  he  received  when  but  IS  years 
of  age.  In  August,  1921,  Bro.  Bills 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Riverton  Ward, 
succeeding  his  older  brother,  Gordon 
S.  Bills.  This  position  he  held  until 
September,  1927,  when  the  Riverton 
Ward  was  divided  into  two  wards, 
and  new  bishoprics  chosen.  Bishop 
Bills  has  been  a  leading  man  in  his 
community,  acting  as  a  director  of  the 
Jordan  Valley  Bank,  president  of  the 
Riverton  Pipe  Line  Company,  pres- 
ident of  the  Riverton  Canning  Fac- 
tory, etc.  He  was  one  of  the  chief 
movers  in  the  building  of  a  pipe  line 
from  the  mountains  east,  aci'oss  the 
Salt  Lake  Valley,  to  Riverton,  which 
now  has  a  good  water  system.  Water 
for  the  settlement  had  previously  been 
obtained  from  a  spring  above  Draper. 
He  also  engages  in  farming  and  mer- 
chandising. 

BOWNS,  Jared  Harrison,  Presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Almy  Branch,  Wood- 
ruff Stake,  Uinta  Co.,  Wyoming,  was 
born  Sept.  24,  1889,  at  Almy,  Uinta 
Co.,  Wyoming,  the  son  of  James 
Bowns  and  Christine  W.  Spowart. 
He  was  baptized  by  his  father  May 
26,  1897,  was  ordained  a  Priest,  March 
5,  1911,  and  an  Elder,  May  21,  1916, 
by  James  Bowns.  He  received  his 
first  schooling  in  Uinta  County,  Wy- 
oming, and  Carbon  County,  Utah.  He 
also  took  a  special  course  of  study  in 
coal  mining,  which  occupation  he  still 
follows.  In  1912  (Aug.  18th),  he  mar- 
ried Helen  V.  Nixon,  from  which 
union  there  are  four  children,  namely, 
Wilburn,  Marguerite,  Ruth  and  Jean. 
Brother  Bowns  has  always  been  a 
faithful  Church  worker  and  has  acted 
as  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
superintendent  of  the  Sunday  school 
in  the  Almy  Branch.  He  has  also 
acted  as  second  counselor  to  James 
Bowns  and  as  first  counselor  to  Alonzo 
Hutchinson  of  the  Almy  Branch.  On 
Nov.  9,  1924,  he  was  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  Almy  Branch,  which 
position  he  still  held  in  1930. 


BRADSHAW,  Ira  Hinton.  1st  Bish- 
op of  the  Hurricane  South  Ward,  Zion 
Park  Stake,  Washington  Co.,  Utah, 
was  born  Aug.  7,  1884,  at  Virgin  City, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ira 
E.  Bradshaw  and  Marion  Hinton.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  7,  1892,  by  James 
Jepson  in  Virgin  City,  where  he  was 
raised  and  received  a  common  school 
education.  Later  he  attended  the 
branch  of  the  B.  Y.  U.  at  Beaver, 
Utah.  Taking  an  active  part  in 
Church  affairs,  he  was  ordained  a 
Deacon  and  afterwards  a  Teacher  at 
Beaver.  After  being  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty in  1906  by  Joseph  W.  McMurrin, 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1906-1909,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  the  State  of  Oklahoma. 
After  returning  to  Utah,  he  located  at 
Hurricane,  whei'e  he  acted  as  an  of- 
ficer in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  filled 
other  local  ecclesiastical  positions. 
Thus  he  acted  as  first  assistant  super- 
intendent of  the  Hurricane  Sunday 
school  for  7  years;  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  24,  1923,  by  Anthony  W. 
Ivins  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Hurricane  Ward,  which  position 
he  held  until  Aug.  26,  1928,  when  the 
Hurricane  Ward  was  divided,  on  which 
occasion  he  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of 
the  Hurricane  South  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  occupied  in  1930.  In 
1910  (June  1),  he  married  Emma 
Webb  in  the  St.  George  Temple.  This 
union  has  been  blessed  with  7  children, 
viz.,  William  Ray,  Hal  Hinton,  Enid 
and  Elaine  (twins),  Marion  (de- 
ceased), Gwynne  and  Ira  Webb.  Bish- 
op Bradshaw  is  by  avocation  a  farmer 
and  a  freighter,  and  is  throughout  a 
man  of  affairs. 

BRAMWELL,  E.  Ernest,  field  sup- 
ervisor of  L.  D.  S.  seminaries,  was 
born  August  28,  1869,  at  Sheffield, 
England,  the  son  of  George  W.  Bram- 
well  and  Mary  Ann  Stevenson.  He 
emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Utah 
in  1870,  and  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  of  age  by  Peter  C.  Green.  After 
obtaining  a  good  school  education  he 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


15 


attended  the  B.  Y.  College  in  Logan 
and  later  the  Univei-sity  of  Utah, 
fi'om  which  institution  he  graduated 
with  a  B.  A.  degree.  He  also  did 
graduate  work  at  the  University  of 
Chicago  and  also  in  California.  After 
teaching  school  in  Salt  Creek,  Weber 


County,  Utah,  two  years,  he  became 
principal  of  the  Rexburg  City  schools 
in  1893,  continuing  in  that  capacity 
two  years.  In  1907,  after  completing 
his  work  at  the  University  of  Utah, 
he  was  called  by  Church  authorities 
to  take  charge  as  principal  of  the 
Fielding  Academy  at  Paris,  Idaho,  act- 
ing in  that  capacity  three  years.  In 
1910  he  was  called  by  Church  authori- 
ties to  Canada  to  begin  Church  school 
work  under  the  British  flag,  in  the 
Knight  Academy  at  Raymond,  Alberta. 
After  serving  thus  four  years,  he  was 
called  to  Snowflake,  Arizona,  and  the 
next  year  to  Ephraim,  Sanpete  Co., 
Utah,  where  he  taught  in  the  Snow 
College  three  years.  In  1918  he  went 
to  Manti,  and  there  opened  what  is 
now  the  Manti  Senior  Seminary.  Af- 
ter moving  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  1920 
he  continued  his  seminary  work  in 
different  schools.  Summing  up  his 
activities  in  the  Church  schools,  Bro. 
Bramwell  acknowledges  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  in  the  success  that  has  fol- 
lowed  him   in   all   his   moves,   and  by 


being  obedient  to  the  call  of  the  Priest- 
hood he  is  actually  one  of  the  fathers 
of  the  Church  school  system.  In  1929 
the  L.  D.  S.  College  in  Salt  Lake  City 
organized  a  religious  educational  de- 
partment, where  he  taught  one  year. 
In  1930  he  became  field  supervisor 
of  the  seminary  work  throughout  the 
Church,  and  in  this  capacity  he  is  now 
doing  a  splendid  work. 

While  residing  in  the  Fremont  Stake 
of  Zion  he  acted  as  superintendent 
of  Sunday  schools,  and  later  as  stake 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools  in 
the  Taylor  and  South  Sanpete  stakes. 
He  also  served  as  the  first  Bishop  of 
the  Hillcrest  Ward  in  Salt  Lake  Coun- 
ty from  October  13,  1924,  to  November 
8,  1925.  After  that  he  served  as  head 
of  the  Grant  Stake  religion  class 'and 
junior  seminary  work,  and  in  1930 
he  was  chosen  as  a  High  Councilor  in 
the  stake,  which  position  he  held  until 
September,  1932,  when  he  moved  to 
the  Ensign  Stake,  where  he  now  re- 
sides. 

In  1895  he  became  deputy  clerk  of 
the  District  Court  of  Fremont  County 
and  later  clerk  of  said  court.  In  1900- 
1902  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain, where  he  acted  as  president  of 
the  Manchester  Conference.  While  on 
this  mission  he  received  an  appoint- 
ment from  the  governor  of  Idaho  to 
represent  the  state  at  an  international 
exposition  held  at  the  Crystal  Palace, 
London.  While  attending  that  gath- 
ering, he  labored  as  a  missionary  in 
the   London   Conference. 

Bro.  Bramwell  is  the  author  of  sev- 
eral books.  Among  these,  he  wrote 
"The  Teachers  Manual"  and  "Noted 
Religious  Teachers,"  used  in  the  teach- 
er-training department  of  the  Church. 
Also,  after  15  years  research,  he  pub- 
lished a  book  entitled  "Why  Do  I  Be- 
lieve?"— a  special  work  of  reference 
and  an  aid  to  speakers.  He  also  pre- 
pared the  Old  Testament  outlines  used 
in  the  Church  schools  for  five  years. 

In  1896  (March  4th)  he  married 
Zilpha  Ann  Holman  of  Rexburg,  Idaho, 
daughter  of  John  G.  Holman  and 
Sarah  Loader,  born  July  4,  1876.    This 


IG 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


union  has  been  blessed  with  nine  chil- 
dren, namely,  Zilpha  Viola,  Ernest, 
jun.,  Clyde,  Ruth,  Ralph,  Genevieve, 
Alberton,  Vivian,  and  Helen;  seven 
of  these  children  are  still  living. 

Bro.  Bramwell  says:  "There  is  no 
such  thing  in  our  Church  as  duty;  it 
should  read  privilege  and  blessing.  In 
all  Church  work  the  law  of  compensa- 
tion is  evident.  No  matter  what  we 
are  called  to  do  in  the  Church,  we  get 
returns  far  greater  than  the  invest- 
ment. I  have  proved  this  to  be  safe 
and  sound.  The  Lord  told  Joseph 
Smith  the  Prophet  to  get  out  of  debt, 
and  from  Joseph  Smith  down  to  the 
present  general  authorities  of  the 
Church  we  have  been  given  this  coun- 
sel:.'Get  out  of  debt,  keep  out  of  debt, 
and  lay  aside  a  little  surplus  for  a 
rainy  day.'  This  counsel  I  have  fol- 
lowed to  the  very  letter.  It  pays  to 
do  so;  not  only  in  the  field  of  dollars 
and  cents,  but  from  the  standpoint 
of  joy  and  comfort  and  satisfaction 
in  life.  Such  a  course  spells  freedom, 
in  the  broadest  sense  of  the  word." 

BROUGH,  Harold  Eugene,  Bishop 
of  Evanston  Ward,  Woodruff  Stake, 
Wyoming,  was  born  March  14,  1895, 
at  Randolph,  Rich  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Benjamin  R.  Brough  and  Pearl 
Muir.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  5,  1903, 
by  his  father  and  was  raised  and  par- 
tially educated  at  Randolph,  Utah,  and 
later  attended  the  B.  Y.  C.  at  Logan. 
He  was  ordained  a  Deacon  and  be- 
came president  of  the  Deacons  quo- 
rum at  Randolph,  Oct.  1,  1917.  Later 
he  was  ordained  a  Teacher  by  John 
C.  Gray  and  an  Elder  by  Hyruni 
J.  Morris,  jun.  In  1917  (Oct.  4),  he 
married  Isabella  Moslander  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  In  June,  1918,  he  en- 
listed in  the  U.  S.  army,  but  was 
called  home  from  Lewisville,  Ky.,  Oct. 
4,  1918,  owing  to  the  death  of  his 
wife,  and  was  finally  discharged  from 
service  Dec.  17,  1918.  In  1920-1922 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
presiding  part  of  the  time  over  the 
Nottingham  Conference.  In  1923 
(Feb.  21),  he  married  Louie  Welch  in 


the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  and  about  the 
same  time  was  appointed  president  of 
the  Second  Quorum  of  Elders  in  the 
Woodruff  Stake.  In  1922  he  was 
called  to  act  as  first  counselor  to 
Ernest  G.  Burdette  in  the  stake  su- 
perintendency     of     Sunday     schools. 


Being  called  to  preside  over  the 
Evanston  Ward  Sept.  13,  1925,  he 
was  oi'dained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop,  Oct.  10,  1925,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard.  This  position  he  still  oc- 
cupies. Bishop  Brough  is  employed 
as  clerk  of  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad 
at  Evanston. 

BROWN,  James,  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Woodruff  Stake, 
Uinta  Co.,  Wyoming,  was  born  May 
24,  1861,  at  Calderbank,  Lanarkshire, 
Scotland,  the  son  of  James  Brown  and 
Isabella  Dick.  His  parents  being- 
members  of  the  Church,  young  James 
was  baptized  by  his  father  in  October, 
1869,  near  Hamilton,  Lanarkshire.  He 
emigrated  by  himself  to  Utah  in  1879, 
and  after  residing  in  Salt  Lake  City 
two  years,  he  became  a  permanent 
resident  of  Evanston,  in  1880,  and  to 
that  place  he  emigrated  his  father 
and  mother,  with  six  brothers  and 
two  sisters.  Having  learned  the  trade 
of   a   blacksmith    in    Scotland,  he   ob- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


17 


tained  employment  with  the  Union 
Pacific  Railroad  Co.,  in  Evanston, 
where  from  the  beginning  he  took  an 
active  part  in  Church  activities.  Thus 
he  became  a  Sunday  school  teacher  in 
1880;  later  treasurer  and  still  later 
president  of  the  ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  a  ward  teacher.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  Evanston  by  Bishop  Wm. 
G.  Burton  in  September,  1880,  and  on 
May  14,  1882,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Alma  Eldredge  and  set  apart 
to  act  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 


Alfred  Blackburn  of  the  Evanston 
Ward.  He  held  this  position  until 
Nov.  11,  1883,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Albert  Carring- 
ton  and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Evanston  Ward,  succeeding  Bishop 
Blackburn.  On  July  27,  1882,  he  mar- 
ried Christina  Hunter,  which  union 
was  blessed  with  seven  children  (four 
boys  and  three  girls)  namely:  James, 
Elizabeth  P.,  Isabella,  Tiena,  Adam 
H.,  Wm.  G.  and  Frank  H.  Being  called 
on  a  mission  to  Scotland  he  labored 
faithfully  in  the  British  Mission 
from  1904-1906. 

Bishop    Brown's    administration    as 
a    presiding   ecclesiastical    officer    for 


43  years  was  a  most  successful  one, 
during  which  time  he  gained  the  good 
will  and  confidence  of  both  "Mormons" 
and  non-Mormon  alike.  With  his 
natural  magnetism  and  exemplary  life 
he  gained  the  confidence  of  all  his 
associates,  and  the  non-Mormon  popu- 
lation referred  to  the  L.  D.  S.  organi- 
zation in  Evanston  as  Bishop  Brown's 
Church  and  the  ward  increased  in 
membership,  which,  with  Bishop 
Brown  as  an  example,  manifested  a 
spirit  of  brotherly  love  throughout. 
A  fine  L.  D.  S.  meeting  house  was 
erected  in  Evanston  and  all  the 
Church  auxiliary  organizations  pros- 
pered. Besides  being  a  successful 
Church  officer,  Bishop  Brown  has 
filled  a  number  of  secular  positions  of 
honor  and  responsibility  in  the  com- 
munity. Thus  he  served  from  1893 
to  1894  as  deputy  county  clerk,  and 
after  that  (from  1893-1902)  as  county 
clerk.  He  also  served  as  president  of 
the  school  board  for  25  years  and  at 
present  is  serving  as  clerk  of  the 
district  court,  a  position  which  he  has 
held  continually  for  many  years. 

After  serving  33  years  as  Bishop 
of  Elvanston,  Brother  Brown  was  set 
apart  July  25,  1915,  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Stake  President  John  M. 
Baxter.  In  1918  he  was  promoted  to 
first  counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency, 
which  position  he  held  until  July  1, 
1928,  when  the  presidency  of  the 
Woodruff  Stake  was  reorganized. 
James  Brown  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch Oct.  26,  1919,  by  Apostle  George 
F.  Richards. 

BROWN,    James    Christensen,    1st 

counselor  in  the  South  Sevier  Stake 
presidency,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  1,  1881,  in  Monroe,  Sevier  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Christian  Christen- 
sen Brown  and  Johanne  Nielsen.  He 
was  baptized  by  Joseph  H.  Jenson 
when  9  years  old,  was  raised  and 
received  a  common  school  education  in 
Monroe,  and  afterwards  attended  the 
Snow  College  in  Ephraim  one  year. 
He  was   ordained   successively  to  the 


Vol.   IV.   N.I 


April,   1932 


18 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest, 
Elder,  Seventy  and  High  Priest.  In 
1907-1909  he  filled  a  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia, laboring  in  the  Aarhus  Con- 
ference, Denmark.  Prior  to  leaving 
on  this  mission,  he  acted  as  secretary 
and  later  as  president  of  the  Monroe 


Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  also  as  assistant 
superintendent  of  the  Sunday  school. 
After    being    ordained    a    Seventy    he 
became  a  president  of  the  41st  Quorum 
of  Seventy.     He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  John  Henry  Smith  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  to   Bishop 
Joseph  H.  Jenson  of  the  Monroe  North 
Ward,    and    when    the    South    Sevier 
Stake  w^as  organized,  Jan.  30,  1921,  he 
was    chosen    as    clerk    of    said    stake. 
In   1910   he   married   Annie    Magleby, 
daughter    of    Hans     O.    Magleby    of 
Monroe.     This  union  was  blessed  with 
seven     children,     viz.,     Naomi,     Beth, 
Faye,  Janice,  Ruth,  Ruby  and  Annie. 
Brother    Brown's    wife    died    Dec.    28, 
1922,  and  on  Nov.  14,  1923,  he  married 
Jennie  Schiin  of  Christiania,  Norway, 
in    the    Salt    Lake    Temple.      In    No- 
vember, 1925,  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to   Pres.   John   E.    Magleby 
of  the  South  Sevier  Stake,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  until  May  13,  1928,  when 
he   was   chosen   as   first   counselor   to 
Pres.    James    R.    Ware    in    the    presi- 


dency of  said  stake,  which  position  he 
still  occupies.  In  1926-1927  he  filled  a 
shoi't  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States,  laboring  principally  in  Seattle. 
Brother  Brown  is  a  farmer  by  avo- 
cation. 

BURGESS,  Edward   W.,  Bishop   of 
the  Alpine  Ward,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born    Oct.    16,    1891,   in    Pine   Valley, 
Washington    Co.,    Utah,    the    son    of 
George    Edward    Burgess    and    Emily 
Jeffery.      When    eight    years    old    he 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Lund,  White 
Pine  Co.,  Nevada,  where  he  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  3,  1900,  by  William  H.  Ivins 
and  attended  public  schools  there  and 
later  in  Alpine,  where  he  moved  when 
sixteen   years   old,  and  where  he  has 
resided   permanently   ever   since.      He 
was  ordained  a   Deacon  by  Orrin  H. 
Snow    Nov.    1,    1903,    a    Teacher    by 
George   G.  Burgess  Nov.  30,  1908,  a 
Priest    by    Joseph    T.    Bateman    Feb. 
13,  1911,  and  an  Elder  by  Joseph  A. 
Bateman  March  11,  1912.     He  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northwestern  States  in 
1912-1914,     laboring     principally     in 
Seattle  and  Tacoma,  State  of  Wash- 
ington.    In  1815   (Feb.  3rd)   he  mar- 
ried   Inez   Thurza   Clark   in   the    Salt 
Lake    Temple.      Two    children    (Ross 
Clark  and  Ula)  have  blessed  this  mar- 
riage.    Bro.  Burgess  has  always  been 
active  in  Church  affairs  and  acted  as 
a  Sunday  school  officer  and  presided 
over  the  Alpine  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
9,  1924,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant  and 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
James    W.    Vance,   which    position   he 
held  until  July  22,  1928,  when  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Orson 
F.  Whitney  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Alpine  Ward.     Bro.  Burgess 
has    held    several    positions    of    honor 
and   responsibility    in   the   community 
and  has  been  a  faithful  worker  in  the 
auxiliary    organizations    and    also    in 
secular  labors.     At  present  he  is  en- 
gaged   in   farming   and    dairying   and 
makes  an  excellent  presiding  officer. 
Under  his  administration  a  new  meet- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


19 


inghouse  was  erected  in  Alpine  at  a 
cost  of  $50,000,  the  formei-  meeting- 
house having  been  destroyed  by  fire 
Oct.  20,  1928. 

BURGON,  Heber  James,  first  pres- 
ident of  the  East  Jordan  Stake  of 
Zion,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
May  20,  1882,  in  Union,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  the  late  Bishop 
Willard  C.  Burgon  and  Emma  Crouch. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1891,  by 
Andrew  Johnson  and  was  raised  and 
schooled  in  Union,  and  later  attended 
the  L.  D.  S.  University  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  Having  been  an  active  church 
member  since  his  early  youth,  he  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  by  Thomas  H. 
Smart,  June  4,  1893,  a  Teacher  by 
Willard  C.  Burgon,  May  23,  1897,  and 
a  Priest  Dec.  31,  1899,  by  Willard  C. 
Burgon.  Later,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1902-1905,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  Ireland,  where  he  presided 
over  the  Irish  Conference.  After  his 
return  home,  he  labored  as  a  home 
missionary  and  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  Jan.  9, 
1910.  He  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  Education  of  the  Jordan 
School  District  for  two  years  and  was 
a  member  of  the  board  of  directors 
of  the  Sandy  City  Bank  for  several 
years.  In  1918  he  was  chosen  to  act  as 
Bishop  of  the  Union  Ward,  being  or- 
dained to  that  position  May  12,  1918, 
by  Apostle  Stephen  L.  Richards.  He 
held  that  office  until  May  8,  1927, 
when  he  was  chosen  as  president  of 
the  East  Jordan  Stake  of  Zion,  which 
position  he  has  since  magnified  and 
proven  himself  an  efficient  and  popu- 
lar presiding  officer.  In  1905  (Nov. 
15th),  he  married  Lulu  M.  Hansen  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  His  wife,  after 
bearing  him  two  children,  namely, 
Afton  Lulu  and  Marvin  Heber,  died 
March  29,  1912.  In  1916  (Oct.  18th), 
he  married  Rosa  Jeannette  Hurler, 
which  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
five  children,  namely,  Stanley  Willard, 
Beulah,  Grant  Clarence,  Beth  Ludene, 


and  Jennie  LaRae.  At  present  he 
serves  as  a  member  of  the  Jordan 
school  board  and  as  director  of  the 
Sandy  City  Bank.  Otherwise  he  is  a 
contractor  and  builder  by  avocation. 

BURTON,  Robert  Ibbotson,  first 
president  of  the  Mount  Ogden  Stake, 
Weber  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Feb.  9, 
1879,  at  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Walton  Burton  and  Rachel  Field- 
ing. He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old  by  Moroni  Poulter, 
ordained  a  Deacon  Dec.  3,  1894,  by 
Bishop  Thomas  J.  Stevens,  ordained 
a  Teacher  Oct.  14,  1895,  and  acted  as 
secretary  and  later  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  and  still  later 
as  president  of  the  Teachers  quorum; 
ordained  an  Elder  June  18,  1899,  by 
Bishop  Thomas  J.  Stevens,  and  after 
being  ordained  a  Seventy  July  14, 
1899,  by  Apostle  George  Teasdale,  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in  1899- 
1902.  In  1903  (Dec.  2nd),  he  married 
Letitia  Jane  Richards  (daughter  of 
Charles  C.  Richards  and  Letitia 
Louisa  Peery),  which  union  has  been 
blessed  with  four  children,  namely, 
Robert  Richards,  Charles  Richards, 
Walton  Richards  and  Virginia  Letitia. 
Bro.  Burton  served  as  a  member  of 
the  Stake  Sunday  School  Board  from 
1909  to  1914,  part  of  the  time  as  first 
counselor  in  the  stake  superintend- 
ency.  He  also  acted  as  a  president 
of  the  77th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  After 
being  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  15, 
1916,  by  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff,  he  acted 
as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  Weber 
Stake  until  May  21,  1922,  when  the 
Mount  Ogden  Stake  was  organized, 
and  he  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  new  stake,  being  set 
apart  to  that  position  by  Apostle 
David  O.  McKay,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  Bro.  Burton  has  also  been 
very  active  in  secular  affairs.  From 
1902  to  1908  he  served  as  a  book- 
keeper with  the  Ogden  Implement 
Company,  in  the  First  National  Bank 
and  in  the  Boyle  Furniture  Company 
(with  the  latter  company  from  June, 


20 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


1904,  to  May,  1908).  Later  he  acted 
as  secretary  of  the  Wm.  W.  Burton 
and  Sons  Company  who  carried  on  a 
mercantile  business  in  Ogden.  During 
the  summer  of  1908  he  assisted  in 
organizing  the  Burton  Mercantile 
Company  and  the  Burton  Creamery 
Company  in  Star  Valley,  Wyoming, 
acting  as  secretary  of  both  companies. 
In  1915  he  sold  his  interest  in  the 
mercantile  company  and  became  the 
manager  of  the  Burton  Creamery 
Company,  and  from  1923  to  1926  he 
acted  as  president  of  said  company. 
When  the  Burtons  sold  out  the  cream- 
ery to  the  Kraft  Cheese  Company  of 
Chicago,  the  business  was  in  a  prosper- 
ous condition  and  the  company  had  im- 
ported into  Star  Valley  between  600 
and  700  Holstein  cattle.  In  1909  Bro. 
Burton  helped  to  organize  the  Cres- 
cent Products  Company  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  acted  as  vice-president  in 
that  company  until  he  sold  out  in 
1929.  In  the  meantime  he  served 
as  secretary  and  treasurer  in  the  Utah 
Implement  Company  of  Salt  Lake  City 
for  several  years.  He  became  pres- 
ident of  the  Paine  and  Hurst  Inc.  (a 
dry  goods  firm)  in  April,  1916.  He 
served  as  a  member  of  the  board  of 
trustees  of  the  School  for  the  Deaf 
and  Blind  at  Ogden  from  1919  to  1925; 
was  appointed  secretary  and  treasurer 
of  the  Ogden  Land  Company  in  1924 
and  a  member  of  the  Weber  College 
Board  in  1922.  He  is  still  serving  in 
the  two  last  named  positions. 

BUTTERFIELD,     Almon     Thomas, 

second  president  of  the  West  Joixlan 
Stake  of  Zion,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah, 
was  born  July  5,  1868,  at  Herriman, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Almon 
Butterfield  and  Elizabeth  A.  Farmer. 
He  was  baptized  June  9,  1878,  by 
Thos.  Mumford,  ordained  a  Deacon  in 
1880  and  subsequently  presided  over 
the  Deacons  quorum  at  Herriman, 
ordained  a  Teacher  in  1886,  ordained 
an  Elder  Nov.  18,  1894,  by  Chr. 
Petersen,  ordained  a  Seventy,  Dec.  3, 
1896,    by    Seymour    B.    Young,    and 


filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  in 
1896-1900,  laboring  principally  in  the 
Wairarapa  district.  Prior  to  going  on 
this  mission,  or  on  Oct.  14,  1896,  he 
married  Sarah  J.  Crump  (daughter  of 
Wm.  C.  Crump  and  Sarah  Cornick), 
who  was  born  Sept.  2,  1873.     By  her 


he  is  the  father  of  eight  children, 
namely,  Tira  A.,  Amy  L.,  Marva,  Al- 
mon F.,  Chas  O.,  James  E.,  Thos.  E. 
and  Sarah  Myrle.  In  1904,  he  was 
set  apart  as  a  president  of  the  94th 
Quorum  of  Seventy,  which  position  he 
held  till  1911.  In  1908-1911,  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Central  States,  pre- 
siding a  part  of  the  time  over  the 
St.  John  conference;  later  he  acted 
as  secretary  of  the  mission  and  still 
later  as  acting  president  of  the  Mis- 
souri conference.  While  on  this  mis- 
sion he  visited  Adam-ondi-Ahman, 
Carthage,  Nauvoo  and  other  places 
closely  associated  with  the  history  of 
the  Church.  After  his  return  from 
that  mission,  he  was  chosen  a  member 
of  the  Jordan  Stake  Sunday  School 
Board  and  in  1911  (Nov.  26th)  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  an  alternate  High  Councilor  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  two  years 
later  was  ordained  a  High  Counselor 
and    later    acted    as    senior    member 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


21 


until    the    stake    was    divided    May    8, 
1927. 

When  the  West  Jordan  Stake  of 
Zion  was  organized  May  8,  1927,  he 
was  chosen  as  first  counselor  in  the 
stake  presidency,  which  position  he 
held  until  the  death  of  President  Holt, 
which  occurred  Nov.  11,  1930,  and  on 
Feb.  1,  1931,  he  was  chosen  as  pres- 
ident of  the  West  Jordan  Stake  of 
Zion  with  David  T.  Dahl  as  first  and 
Hyrum  Stocking  as  second  counselor. 
Pres.  Butterfield  is  by  occupation  a 
farmer  and  stock  raiser,  possesses 
ability  as  a  leader  and  has  been  suc- 
cessful also  in  financial  matters. 

CALL,  Ivan,  second  Bishop  of  the 
Ely  Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  White  Pine 
Co.,  Nevada,  was  born  March  10,  1904, 
in  Colonia  Dublan,  Chihuahua,  Mex- 
ico, the  son  of  Willard  Call  and  Leah 
Pratt.  He  was  raised  and  schooled  in 
Mexico  until  he  was  11  years  old,  and 
was  baptized  March  10,  1912,  by  his 
brother  Harold  Call.  During  the  gen- 
eral exodus  of  the  Saints  from  Mex- 
ico in  1912,  he  moved  with  his  parents 
to  El  Paso,  Texas,  where  he  shared 
in  the  hospitality  and  kindness  ex- 
tended to  the  exiled  Saints  by  the 
good  citizens  of  El  Paso.  Later,  the 
family  located  in  Bountiful,  Utah, 
where  Ivan  was  ordained  to  different 
grades  of  the  Priesthood  and  took  an 
active  part  in  Church  work.  Later, 
he  located  in  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he  acted  as  an  officer  in  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  in  the  8th  Ward  and  also  in  the 
superintendency  of  the  ward  Sunday 
school.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Dec.  10,  1923,  by  Israel  Call,  after 
which  he  did  considerable  Temple 
work  for  the  dead.  Locating  in  Mount 
Pleasant,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  he  again 
engaged  in  Sunday  school  work.  He 
married  Marietta  Taylor  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple  March  25,  1929,  and 
soon  afterwards  located  at  Ely,  Ne- 
vada, where  he  acted  as  a  counselor 
in  an  Elders  quorum  until  July  5, 
1930,  when  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  Melvin 


J.  Ballard,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Ely  Ward,  which  position  he 
still  occupies.  His  first  child,  Leah 
May,  was  born  July  9,  1930.  Bishop 
Call  is  a  groceryman  by  avocation  and 
takes  an  active  part  in  secular  mat- 
ters, as  well  as  in  ecclesiastical  duties, 
being  ever  on  hand  to  labor  in  the 
interest  of  his  fellow-religionists  and 
fellow-citizens  generally. 

CANNON,  George  Jenkins,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Ensign  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  July 
27,  1879,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Abraham  H.  Cannon  and 
Sarah  Ann  Jenkins.     He  was  baptized 


July  27,  1887,  by  his  father,  ordained 
a  Deacon  November  1,  1891,  by  Bishop 
John  Tingey  of  the  17th  Ward;  later 
he  was  ordained  a  Teacher.  He  was 
ordained  a  Priest  Nov.  19,  1897,  by 
Bishop  Lewis  M.  Cannon  of  the  Can- 
non Ward,  an  Elder  Dec.  12,  1898,  by 
Pres.  George  Q.  Cannon,  a  Seventy 
Dec.  30,  1898,  by  J.  G.  Kimball  of  the 
First  Council  of  Seventies,  and  a  High 
Priest  May  17,  1903,  by  Angus  M. 
Cannon,  president  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake.  From  his  earliest  youth  Geo. 
J.  Cannon  has  taken  an  active  part  in 
Church  activities.  First  he  acted  as 
a  president  of  a  Deacons  quorum  and 
later  as  secretary  of  the  110th  Quo- 


22 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


rum  of  Seventy  in  the  5th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City.  As  a  Seventy  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Germany  in  1899-1902,  dur- 
ing which  he  acted  as  president  of  the 
Freiburg  and  Breslau  branches  of  the 
Church  and  later  as  secretary  of  the 
German  Mission  at  the  mission  head- 
quarters in  Berlin.  After  his  return 
from  that  mission,  he  acted  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Nelson  A.  Empey 
of  the  13th  Ward,  and  later  as  first 
counselor  to  the  same  Bishop.  In 
April,  1904,  he  moved  into  the  27th 
Ward,  and  in  October,  1912,  to  the 
18th  Ward.  From  June,  1918,  to 
December,  1923,  he  acted  as  a  High 
Counselor  in  the  Ensign  Stake  of 
Zion.  In  December,  1923,  he  was 
chosen  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Winslow  F.  Smith  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Ensign  Stake 
of  Zion,  and  in  December,  1928,  as 
first  counselor  to  Pres.  Smith,  which 
position  he  now  (October,  1932)  holds. 
In  his  youth  he  acted  as  president  of 
the  27th  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  two 
years,  and  during  a  number  of  years 
prior  to  his  call  to  the  Ensign  Stake 
presidency  served  as  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 

In  1902  (June  26),  he  married  Lucy 
Grant,  daughter  of  Pres.  Heber  J. 
Grant  and  Lucy  Stringham.  This 
union  has  been  blessed  with  seven 
children,  namely,  Rachel,  Irene,  Flor- 
ence, Jean,  George  Ivins,  Lucy  and 
Heber  Stanley. 

In  secular  capacity  Elder  Cannon 
has  served  as  secretary  to  the  man- 
ager of  the  "Deseret  News,"  as  pri- 
vate secretary  to  Senator  Frank  J. 
Cannon,  has  done  stenographical  work 
at  an  attorney's  office,  was  secretary 
to  the  manager  of  the  Utah  Power 
and  Light  Company,  and  during  the 
past  28  years  he  has  been  connected 
with  Heber  J.  Grant  and  Company  in 
the  insurance  business,  and  is  now 
general  manager  of  said  Company 
and  of  the  Utah  Home  Fire  Insurance 
Company.  Elder  Cannon  is  also  sec- 
retary of  the  Home  Benefit  Building 
Society,    which    position    he    has    oc- 


cupied since  its  organization  in  1915. 
He  is  treasurer  and  second  vice-pres- 
ident of  the  Beneficial  Life  Insurance 
Company,  member  of  the  executive 
committee  and  dii-ector  of  the  Utah 
Savings  and  Trust  Company,  and 
interested  in  other  business  enter- 
prises. 

Elder  Cannon  is  universally  known 
as  a  competent  officer  in  all  the  posi- 
tions he  has  filled  both  of  an  ecclesi- 
astical and  secular  nature,  and  has 
gained  the  confidence  and  good  will  of 
his  co-religionists  and  of  a  large  num- 
ber of  his  fellow  citizens. 

CAPENER,   Russell   Cleveland,  6th 

Bishop  of  the  Riverside  Ward,  Bear 
River  Stake,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  15,  1901,  in  Rivei'side,  the 
son  of  Alfred  A.  Capener  and  Myrtle 
Cleveland.  He  was  educated  in  the 
public  schools  of  Riverside,  after 
which  he  attended  the  high  school  at 
Brigham  City,  graduating  from  that 
institution.  He  afterwards  became  a 
student  in  the  University  of  Utah  for 
two  years.  Being  born  of  Latter-day 
Saint  parents,  he  was  baptized  March 
27,  1910,  by  Leonidas  H.  Kennard,  and 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Priest  and  Elder.  In  1923- 
1925  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  during  which  he  acted  as 
clerk  of  the  Manchester  Conference, 
and  later  presided  over  the  Ulster 
Conference  in  Ireland.  Soon  after  his 
return  from  this  mission,  he  married 
Mildred  Strong  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple, Aug.  27,  1925,  which  union  has 
been  blessed  with  two  children,  viz., 
Winona  and  Lowell  Strong.  At  home 
Bishop  Capener  has  been  an  efficient 
Sunday  school  worker,  and  has  taken 
an  active  part  in  Church  affairs  gen- 
erally. On  May  22,  1926,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
and  set  apart  by  Apostle  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun.,  to  preside  over  the  River- 
side Ward,  which  position  he  still  oc- 
cupies. Bishop  Capener  is  a  farmer 
by  occupation,  and  is  an  influential 
citizen,     having    the     confidence     and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


23 


good  will  of  a  large  circle  of  friends 
and  acquaintances. 

CARTER,  Daniel,  Bishop  of  Porter- 
ville  Ward,  Morgan  Stake,  Morgan 
Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Sept.  24,  1875,  at 
Porterville,  the  son  of  Samuel  Carter 
and  Ellen  Mosser,  and  one  of  a  family 
of  24  children;  his  father  was  one  of 
the  first  settlers  of  Porterville.  He 
was  baptized  July  27,  1884,  by  Thomas 
Phillips  and  raised  in  Porterville, 
where  he  also  received  a  common 
school  education.  From  his  earliest 
youth  he  took  an  active  part  in 
Church  affairs  and  was  ordained  suc- 
cessively to  different  offices  in  the 
Priesthood.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty March  19,  1905,  and  a  High 
Priest  May  31,  1914,  by  Apostle  David 
O.  McKay.  Before  that  he  acted  as  a 
counselor  in  an  Elders  quorum,  served 
as  superintendent  of  the  Porterville 
Sunday  school  about  six  years  and  as 
a  counselor  in  the  stake  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  about  two  years.  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Oct.  2,  1927,  by  Apostle  Mel- 
vin  J.  Ballard  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Porterville  Ward,  after  hav- 
ing acted  as  counselor  to  Bishop  Hy- 
rum  K.  Porter  of  that  ward  for  four 
years,  and  as  counselor  to  Bishop 
Samuel  S.  Florence  for  two  years.  In 
1898  (Nov.  17),  he  married  Margaret 
Bell  Florence,  who  bore  him  seven 
children,  namely.  Golden  H.,  Bessie 
E.,  Henry  S.,  Wallace  D.,  Jessie  P., 
Flossie  S.  and  Roscoe.  Bro.  Carter 
has  been  road  supervisor  in  Morgan 
County  for  four  years  and  has  filled 
other  important  secular  positions. 

CHAMBERS,  Edward  Holroyd,  2nd 

Bishop  of  the  Ogden  13th  Ward,  Og- 
den  Stake,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Oct.  8,  1885,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Alma  Duffin  Chambers  and  Anne 
Pugh  Holroyd.  He  was  baptized  May 
27,  1894,  by  Charles  Henry  Greenwell; 
ordained  a  Deacon  Sept.  30,  1901,  by 
Wm.  C.  Wright,  ordained  a  Teacher 
Oct.  14,  1901,  by  Hyrum  Belnap,  and 
acted  as  second  counselor  in  a  Teach- 


ers quorum;  ordained  an  Elder  Jan. 
29,  1906,  by  Isabrand  Sander,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1906-1908,  laboring  in  the  Manchester 
Conference  as  conference  clerk  and 
as  a  traveling  missionary  in  Man- 
chester, Bolton,  and  Leigh,  in  Lan- 
cashire, England.  In  1909  (June  10), 
he  married  Ellen  Merentha  Greenwell 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  which  union 
has  been  blessed  with  two  children, 
Helen  Greenwell  and  Edward  Green- 
well. His  wife  died  May  9,  1920,  at 
Ogden,  and  in  1924  (June  11),  he  mar- 
ried Laura  Stanford  Goddard.  This 
union  has  also  been  blessed  with  two 
children,  viz.,  Ardell  Goddard  and 
Darold  Holroyd.  Brother  Chambers 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  March  7, 
1910,  by  Fred  W.  Chambers,  and  was 
for  a  number  of  years  a  president  in 
the  77th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  He  also 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Ogden 
6th  Ward  Sunday  School.  After  be- 
ing ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  19, 
1915,  by  E.  S.  Hinckley,  he  acted  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  Owen  M. 
Sanderson  of  the  Ogden  6th  Ward. 
When  he,  in  1916,  became  a  member 
of  the  13th  Ward,  he  served  as  super- 
intendent of  the  13th  Ward  Sunday 
school;  later  he  was  chosen  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Ogden  Stake  High  Council, 
and  acted  as  stake  superintendent  of 
Sunday  schools  in  the  Ogden  Stake  in 
1924-1925.  Bishop  John  Howard  Jen- 
kins was  called  to  preside  over  the 
New  Zealand  Mission  and  Bro.  Cham- 
bers was  called  to  succeed  him  as  Bish- 
op of  the  Ogden  13th  Ward,  July  5, 
1925.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
16,  1925,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and 
still  presides  in  the  ward  named  in 
that  capacity.  Bishop  Chambers  is  a 
graduate  from  the  high  school  of 
Ogden  and  his  avocation  in  life  is  that 
of  an  accountant. 

CHILD,    Thomas     Battersby,    jun., 

5th  Bishop  of  the  Salt  Lake  City  10th 
Ward,  Liberty  Stake,  was  born  May 
6,  1888,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son    of    Thomas    B.    Child,    sen.,    and 


24 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Elizabeth  Livingston.  He  was  raised 
and  educated  in  the  11th  Ward,  and 
later  attended  the  L.  D.  S.  Business 
College  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Being 
baptized  May  4,  1896,  by  William  H. 
Ingham,  he  was  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher, 
Priest,  Elder,  Seventy,  High  Priest 
and  Bishop.  After  being  ordained  an 
Elder  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States,  1909-1910,  laboring  in 
Iowa  and  Illinois.  After  returning 
from  that  mission,  he  married  Bertha 


Rumel,  April  12,  1911,  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  The  children  of  this 
union  are  the  following:  Lucille, 
Francis  (deceased),  Robert  and  Joan. 
Brother  Child  was  an  active  Sunday 
school  worker  in  the  10th  Ward, 
acting  as  second,  later  as  first,  and 
then  superintendent  of  the  school.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  2,  1914, 
by  J.  Golden  Kimball  and  acted  as 
a  president  of  the  16th  Quorum  of 
Seventy.  After  being  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  18,  1923,  by  Hugh 
J.  Cannon,  he  acted  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Joseph  Christenson 
until  Feb.  17,  1923,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Apostle  George  F. 
Richards,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  10th  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.     Bishop  Child  is  a  con- 


tractor and  builder,  specializing  in 
mason  work  and  doing  business 
throughout  the  entire  west:  The  South 
High  School,  Union  Building  at  the 
University  of  Utah,  Greek  Church, 
and  Interurban  Depot  Building  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  the  Union  Pacific  Freight 
Terminal  at  Los  Angeles  and  the  L. 
D.  S.  Church  at  Washington,  D.  C, 
together  with  an  almost  unlimited 
list  of  ward  chapels,  apartment  houses, 
railroad  shops,  business  blocks  and 
residences,  are  contracts  fulfilled  by 
him.  Since  1911  he  has  been  a  res- 
ident of  the   10th  Ward. 

CLEGG,  Benjamin,  a  prominent  and 
faithful  Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born 
April  29,  1857,  in  Tooele,  Tooele  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Benjamin  Clegg  and 
Grace  Mclntyre.  He  was  raised  in 
Tooele,  where  he  attended  the  public 
schools,  and  at  the  age  of  eight  years 
he  was  baptized  by  Pres.  Hugh  S. 
Gowans  at  Tooele,  and  later  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood.  When  28  years  of 
age  he  moved  to  Gentile  Valley,  and 
while  residing  there  in  the  Mound 
Valley  Ward,  he  became  acquainted 
with  Anna  Jane  Williams  (the  daugh- 
ter of  Bishop  Williams)  whom  he  later 
married  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
This  union  was  blessed  with  six  chil- 
dren, namely,  Benjamin  O.,  Robert 
Williams,  Joseph,  Donald  Willard, 
William  Dale  and  Anna  Louetta.  Soon 
after  his  marriage  Bro.  Clegg  located 
in  the  Trout  Creek  Ward,  and  after 
being  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
George  C.  Parkinson  he  acted  as  a 
counselor  in  the  ward  bishopric  for 
13  years.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Australia  in  1897-1900,  where  he  la- 
bored nine  months  in  Queensland  and 
later  one  and  a  half  years  in  Adelaide, 
in  South  Australia,  where  he,  to- 
gether with  Elder  Alexander  A.  Carr, 
reopened  a  missionary  field  after  a 
period  of  thirty  years  during  which 
no  missionary  labors  had  been  per- 
formed by  Latter-day  Saint  mission- 
aries in  that  part  of  the  country. 
Elder  Clegg  acted  as  president  of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


25 


district  thus  opened.  Together  with 
his  missionary  companions,  he  became 
an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  the 
Lord  in  bringing  eleven  new  converts 
into  the  Church.  After  his  return 
from  this  mission  he  again  acted  as 
a  Bishop's  counselor  in  the  Trout 
Creek  Ward,  and  has  ever  been  active 
in  Church  affairs,  besides  filling  a 
number  of  civil  offices  in  the  com- 
munitv.      He    has    been    blessed    with 


good  and  faithful  children,  who  are 
all  active  in  the  Church.  Thus  his 
oldest  son,  Benjamin  Orson,  has  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain.  Another 
son,  Robert  W.,  now  acts  as  Bishop 
of  the  Bench  Ward  in  the  Bannock 
Stake  of  Zion.  His  fourth  son,  Don- 
ald Willard,  has  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  and  later  a  short 
mission  to  the  Western  States.  His 
daughter,  Anna  Louetta,  has  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  and  in 
all  instances  Bro.  Clegg  has  assisted 
these  missionaries  financially.  Bro. 
Clegg  is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser  by 
avocation. 

CONRAD,  Carl  Kunz,  first  presi- 
dent of  the  Nevada  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  Sept.  16,  1878,  at  Altstetten, 
Canton  Zurich,  Switzerland,  the  son  of 


Louis  Conrad  and  Elizabeth  Ochsner. 
Becoming  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
he  was  baptized  Aug.  13,  1892,  by 
Jacob  Huber,  ordained  a  Deacon  July 
4,  1897,  emigrated  from  Switzerland 
to  Utah  in  1901,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  May  30,  1901.  In  August, 
1902,  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Angus  M.  Cannon  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
and  on  Sept.  12,  1902,  he  married 
Sophia  Leterner  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  This  union  has  been  blessed 
with  8  children,  namely,  Henry  C, 
Walter  A.,  Nellie  E.,  Nephi  D.,  Ben 
Eugene,  Robert  J.,  William  H.,  and 
Ethel  R.  In  1904-1906  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States,  labor- 
ing principally  in  the  City  of  Cin- 
cinnati, Ohio.  After  his  return  from 
that  mission,  he  served  as  a  home 
missionary  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake. 
Before  going  on  his  mission  and  also 
afterwards,  he  was  employed  as  a 
niolder  in  the  old  Silver  Brothers 
foundry  on  North  Temple  Street.  In 
November,  1912,  he  moved  with  his 
family  to  McGill,  Nevada,  where  he 
became  an  active  Church  worker,  serv- 
ing first  as  ward  clerk  for  one  year, 
and  was  then  chosen  Bishop  of  the 
McGill  Ward  in  November,  1914.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op April  6,  1915,  by  Apostle  David  O. 
McKay.  After  serving  as  a  Bishop  of 
the  McGill  Ward  until  May,  1921,  he 
resided  at  Metropolis,  Nevada,  two 
years.,  and  then  returned  to  McGill, 
where  he  became  foundry  foreman  for 
the  Nevada  Consolidated  Copper  Com- 
pany in  1924;  this  position  he  still 
holds.  When  the  Nevada  Stake  of 
Zion  was  organized  Aug.  19,  1926,  he 
was  chosen  as  president  of  that  new- 
stake,  being  set  apart  to  that  position 
by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson.  Brother 
Conrad,  by  his  mild  and  pleasant 
ways,  coupled  with  unflinching  in- 
tegrity to  the  Church,  has  made 
friends  of  all  his  associates,  and  as  a 
presiding  officer  he  is  making  a  suc- 
cess of  his  high  and  holy  calling  as 
the  head  of  one  of  the  stakes  of  Zion. 


26 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


CORBITT,  Marion  Leroy,  second 
Bishop  of  Francis  Ward,  Summit  Co., 
Utah,  was  born  Jan.  20,  1864,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel 
Corbitt  and  Camilla  Dorothy  Jacobson. 
Being  born  of  Latter-day  Saint  par- 
ents, he  was  baptized  in  1872  by  An- 
drew Anderson  and  ordained  a  Teacher 
in  Smithfield,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  where 
the  family  resided  for  a  short  time. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  July  12, 
1885,  by  James  Woolstenholme  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern  States 
in  1891-1893.  Both  before  and  after 
his  mission  he  filled  responsible  posi- 
tions in  the  Church  and  was  one  of 
the  young  active  members  of  the 
same.  In  1890  (Jan.  15),  he  married 
Martha  Ellen  Woolstenholme  in  the 
Logan  Temple,  who  bore  him  ten 
children,  namely,  Ethel  Camilla  (who 
married  Ove  A.  Richardson),  Marion 
Leroy  (who  married  Erma  Arrends), 
Martha  E.  (who  married  James  L.  At- 
kinson, Otis  Ray  (who  died  16  years 
old),  Freda  Belle  (wife  of  Carl  C. 
Bradshaw),  Thora,  Linford  (died  May 
23,  1927),  Robert  S.,  Reva  J.  and 
Rada  M.  Bishop  Corbitt  is  a  man  of 
affairs,  a  successful  farmer  and  stock 
raiser  and  a  highly  respected  citizen 
who  has  been  entrusted  with  many 
positions  of  honor  and  responsibility. 
He  has  raised  his  family  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord  and  is  universally  beloved 
and  respected  as  a  faithful  Latter-day 
Saint.  In  November,  1927,  Bishop 
Corbett  moved  to  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  where  he  still  resides. 

CRITTENDEN,  Irwin,  3rd  Bishop 
of  the  Hoytsville  ward.  Summit  Stake, 
Summit  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  13, 
1874,  at  Hoytsville,  the  son  of  Chaun- 
cey  Smith  Crittenden  and  Elizabeth 
Wareing.  Being  born  of  goodly  par- 
ents, he  was  baptized  Oct.  20,  1883,  by 
Oliver  Norton  Harmon,  and  confirmed 
Oct.  21,  1883,  by  Andrew  Hobson.  He 
was  ordained  a  Priest  and  later  an 
Elder  and  Seventy,  the  latter  ordina- 
tion taking  place  Feb.  16,  1900,  by 
Joseph  W.  McMurrin.     In  his  boyhood 


days  he  acted  as  secretary  of  the 
ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was  a  Sunday 
school  teacher  and  otherwise  an  active 
Church  worker.  In  1900-1902  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  labor- 
ing principally  in  West  Virginia.  In 
1904  (Nov.  2),  he  married  Florence 
Brown  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  She 
bore  him  four  children,  namely,  Ruth, 
Glenna  (who  died  in  infancy),  Leone 
and  Allis. 

After  returning  from  his  mission 
Bro.  Chittenden  acted  as  assistant  su- 
perintendent of  stake  religion  classes, 
was  a  Sunday  school  officer,  a  member 
of  the  27th  Quorum  of  Seventy,  etc., 
and  on  Jan.  29,  1910,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Orson  F.  Whitney  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Hoytsville  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds,  and  fills 
the  same  with  marked  ability  and 
diligence.  Bishop  Crittenden  is  a 
.successful  farmer  and  stock-raiser, 
and  a  highly  respected  citizen,  having 
been  entrusted  by  his  fellow-citizens 
with  many  positions  of  responsibility. 
Thus  he  has  acted  as  a  member  of  the 
North  Summit  School  Board  and  as  a 
water  commissioner  of  the  Weber 
River  system.  He  has  always  been 
active  and  prominent  both  in  Church 
and  civil  affairs. 

DAHL,  David  Theodore,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  West 
Jordan  Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah, 
was  born  March  4,  1872,  in  that  part 
of  West  Jordan  included  in  Midvale, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Alex- 
ander Dahl  and  Ellen  Jorgenson.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old  by  James  T.  Turner,  ordained  an 
Elder  Nov.  14,  1904,  by  Alberto  Bate- 
man,  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  12,  1910, 
by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  filled  a  home 
mission  for  six  months  in  the  Jordan 
Stake  during  the  winter  of  1913-1914, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  6, 
1920,  by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson  and 
set  apart  to  act  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Wm.  J.  Leak  in  the  West  Jor- 
dan Ward.     Later,  he  acted  as  a  mem- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


27 


ber  of  the  Jordan  Stake  High  Coun- 
cil, and  when  the  West  Jordan  Stake 
was  organized  May  8,  1927,  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Pres. 
Joseph  M.  Holt  of  that  stake,  which 
position  he  held  until  the  death  of 
Pres.  Holt.  On  Feb.  1,  1931,  he  was 
chosen  as  first  counselor  to  Pres.  Al- 
mon  T.  Butterfield  of  the  West  Jordan 
Stake.  Bro.  Dahl  has  followed  the 
occupation  of  ranching,  and  at  the  age 
of  nineteen  years  he  was  part  owner 


of  a  ranch,  raising  sheep  and  cattle, 
and  also  dealing  in  meat  and  gro- 
ceries. In  1906  he  sold  his  meat  and 
grocery  business  and  purchased  a 
farm  in  West  Jordan,  where  he  still 
resides.  Later,  he  engaged  in  ex- 
tensive dry  farming,  is  the  owner  of 
1,600  acres  of  land,  and  paid  special 
attention  to  raising  wheat.  Among 
the  many  civil  offices  held  by  Elder 
Dahl,  we  may  mention  that  he  was 
the  first  president  of  the  West  Jor- 
dan Commercial  Club,  director  of  Salt 
Lake  County  Farmers'  Equity,  pres- 
ident of  Salt  Lake  County  Wheat 
Growers  Association,  member  of  Jor- 
dan School  District  Board  of  Educa- 
tion (from  1923  to  1931),  and  during 
the  last  four  years  acted  as  vice- 
president  of  said  board.  In  February 
and    March,    1930,    he    attended    the 


National  Educational  Convention  and 
the  National  School  Board  Convention 
at  Atlantic  City,  New  Jersey.  On 
that  occasion  he  visited  leading- 
schools  and  cities  throughout  the  East 
and  Middle  West;  he  also  visited  the 
national  capital,  the  Hill  Cumorah, 
and  the  Joseph  Smith  Farm,  etc.  In 
1899  (Nov.  29th),  he  married  Johanna 
Maria  Rodberg,  who  died  Sept.  21, 1901. 
He  married  Amanda  Teressa  Pehrson 
Nov.  17,  1904.  This  latter  union  has 
been  blessed  with  five  sons  and  two 
daughter's,  namely,  Lawrence  Theo- 
dore and  Clarence  Peter  (both  of 
whom  have  filled  missions  for  the 
Church),  Arthur  David,  Harvey  Alex- 
ander, Marvin  James,  Mary  Ellen  and 
Elizabeth  Evelyn.  Bro.  Dahl  is  a  man 
of  affairs,  a  natural  leader  and  the 
possessor  of  a  pronounced  personality. 

DIMOND,  Edwin  Robert,  fourth 
Bishop  of  the  Magna  Ward,  Oquirrh 
Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  16,  1888,  at  West  Jordan,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Robert  E. 
Dimond  and  Mary  E.  Bateman.  He 
was  raised  and  schooled  in  West  Jor- 
dan, attending  school  principally  in 
the  Taylorsville  District.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  16,  1896,  by  Robert  E. 
Dimond,  ordained  a  Deacon  Dec.  30, 
1900,  by  John  A.  Egbert  and  acted  as 
president  of  a  Deacons  quorum;  or- 
dained a  Teacher  March  6,  1904,  by 
Daniel  R.  Bateman  and  acted  as  pres- 
ident of  a  Teachers  quorum;  ordained 
a  Priest  Oct.  1,  1905,  by  John  A.  Eg- 
bert, and  an  Elder  April  1,  1907,  by 
John  S.  Hansen.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1908-1911,  laboring 
in  the  London  Conference,  part  of 
the  time  as  presiding  Elder  of  the 
Gravesend  Branch.  Prior  to  going  on 
this  mission  he  was  a  student  at  the 
B.  Y.  University  at  Provo,  Utah.  After 
returning  from  his  mission  he  served 
on  the  Sunday  school  board  of  the 
Jordan  Stake  and  as  a  home  mission- 
ary. On  April  24,  1913,  he  man-ied 
Hilma  L.  Malmstrom  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed    with    five    children,    namely. 


28 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Darrel  Edwin,  Doris,  Lila,  Lynn 
Joseph  and  Harvey  Dahle.  Elder 
Dimond  moved  to  Magna  in  1913, 
where  he  took  an  active  part  in  the 
affairs  of  the  Magna  Branch,  acting 
as  ward  teacher,  instructor  in  the 
ward  Y.  M.  M.  L  A.  and  also  in  an 
Elders  quoi'um,  acted  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  14th 
Quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Pioneer  Stake 
and  later  as  president  of  the  4th 
Quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Oquirrh 
Stake.  On  Oct.  23,  1927,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  Rud- 
ger  Clawson  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  the  bishopric  of  the 
Magna  Ward,  which  position  he  held 


until  Aug.  19,  1928,  when  he  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Oquirrh  Stake.  On 
May  2,  1931,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  David  O.  McKay.  Besides 
laboring  faithfully  in  ecclesiastical 
affairs,  Bishop  Dimond  has  held  a 
number  of  civil  positions,  and  through 
his  diligence  and  faithfulness  he  has 
succeeded  in  getting  the  Magna  Ward 
into  a  prosperous  condition.  Bi.shop 
Dimond  is  known  as  a  man  of  strict 
integrity  and  reliability.  He  is  em- 
ployed by  the  Utah  Copper  Company 
in  the  Fine  Crushing  Department  of 
said  company. 


FAIRBOURN,  Edward,  4th  Bishop 
of  the  Crescent  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  25,  1889,  at  Crescent  (near 
Draper),  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  Fairbourn  and  Hannah 
Maria  Reynerson.  He  received  a  com- 
mon school  education  and  was  bap- 
tized June  20,  1897,  by  Nels  A.  Nelson. 
Taking  an  active  part  in  Church  mat- 
ters from  his  early  youth,  he  was 
ordained  successively  a  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Priest,  Elder,  High  Priest 
and  Bishop.  While  yet  quite  young 
he  acted  as  president  of  a  Deacons 
quorum,  teacher  in  the  local  Sunday 
school  and  an  officer  in  the  local  Y. 
M.  M.  L  A.  In  1911  (May  31).  he 
married  Myrtle  Kemp,  of  Crescent. 
The  children  by  this  marriage  are 
Alva  W.,  Verna,  Leah,  LeRoy,  Clyde, 
Ivane,  Lynn  and  Marvin  E.  On  April 
1,  1919,  Bro.  Fairbourn  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Arthur  G.  Morris 
of  the  Crescent  Ward  by  Soren  Ras- 
mussen.  This  position  he  held  until 
Feb.  7,  1925,  when  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Cresct-nt  Wai'd,  which  position  he  .>till 
hold.s.  As  a  Church  worker  Bishop 
Fairbourn  has  held  many  positions  in 
the  Church  and  in  a  secular  way  he 
has  held  positions  of  responsibility 
and  honor  in  the  community.  He  is  a 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  by  avocation. 

FAWCETT,    George    William,    4th 

Bishop  of  the  Lund  Ward,  Nevada 
Stake,  White  Pine  County,  Nevada, 
was  born  Dec.  15,  1874,  in  St.  George, 
Utah,  the  son  of  George  W.  Fawcett 
and  Louisa  Eardley.  He  was  baptized 
Dec.  15,  1882,  by  A.  P.  Winsor,  and 
grew  to  manhood  as  a  resident  of 
Price  Ward  (6  miles  south  of  St. 
George).  He  received  a  common 
school  education,  took  an  active  part 
in  Church  matters  from  his  earliest 
youth,  was  ordained  a  Deacon  when 
about  12  years  of  age  and  served  as 
president  of  the  Price  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


29 


I.  A.  In  March,  18U9,  he  moved  to 
White  Pine  County,  Nevada,  and  lo- 
cated at  Lund,  where  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  January,  1900,  by  Bishop 
Thomas  Judd.  On  Feb.  27,  1900,  he 
married  Miss  Martha  Ella  Allen  Terry 
in  the  St.  George  Temple.  He  was 
taking  a  most  active  part  in  the  Lund 
Ward  as  one  of  the  superintendency 
of  the  Sunday  school  and  in  the  pres- 
idency of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  when  he 
in  1909  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  Northwestern  States.  While  on 
this  mission  he  served  as  president  of 
the  East  W^ashington  Conference  with 
headquarters  at  Spokane  from  Nov. 
15,  1909,  to  April  1,  1910.  On  May 
22,  1922,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  James 
E.  Talmage  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Lund  Ward,  which  position 
he  occupied  until  Sept.  19,  1926.  Since 
then  he  has  acted  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council.  The  marriage  of  Bish- 
op Fawcett  to  Martha  Ella  Allen 
Terry  has  been  blessed  with  five  chil- 
dren, viz.,  Luella,  George  Thorley, 
Erma,  Lavon  C,  and  Vilate.  Brother 
Fawcett  is  a  farmer  and  stockraiser 
by  avocation,  and  is  known  in  the 
community  as  a  faithful  and  indus- 
trious Latter-day  Saint. 

FREDRICKSON,      Joseph      James, 

Bishop  of  Vernon  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Sept.  12, 
1883,  in  Vernon,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Niels  Frederickson  and  Mary  S.  Niel- 
sen. His  youth  was  spent  mostly  on 
his  father's  farm.  In  1898,  together 
with  his  brother,  and  with  the  aid  of 
his  father,  he  entered  the  mercantile 
business,  which  he  followed  until  1917. 
In  1923  he  entered  once  more  into  this 
business.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
8  years  old,  and  was  ordained  to  of- 
fices in  the  Priesthood  in  the  following- 
order:  Ordained  a  Deacon  Dec.  26, 
1897,  by  Erick  J.  Pehrson,  a  Priest 
Nov.  26,  1899,  by  Erick  J.  Pehrson, 
an  Elder  April  12,  1903,  by  Charles 
L.  Anderson;  a  Seventy  June  29,  1913, 
by    Geo.    F.    Richards,    and    a    High 


Priest  Jan.  12,  1924,  by  John  Wells. 
From  his  early  youth  he  took  an 
active  part  in  mutual  improvement 
work,  acting  as  secretary,  and  later  as 
president  of  the  Vernon  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  In  May,  1916,  he  was  sustained 
as  superintendent  of  the  Vernon  Sun- 
day school,  which  position  he  held  un- 
til December,  1917,  when  he  left  for  a 
short   term   mission,  on   which  he   la- 


."T^fll^^; 


yiv 


bored  in  and  around  Phoenix,  Arizona, 
under  the  direction  of  the  stake  presi- 
dency of  the  Maricopa  Stake.  After 
his  return  home,  he  again  acted  in 
the  superintendency  of  the  Sunday 
school,  and  in  April,  1924,  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Vernon  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  holds.  In  1906  (Sept. 
12),  he  married  Agnes  M.  Larson  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  which  union 
has  been  blessed  with  eight  children, 
viz.,  Deverial  J.,  Merrill  J.  (deceased), 
Agnes  Arline,  Florence  E.,  Marvin  E., 
Emma  Carol,  Kenneth  J.,  and  Ralph 
Vernald.  Bishop  Fredrickson  is  a 
man  of  affairs,  and  by  his  diligence 
and  devotion  to  duty  he  has  won  the 
confidence  and  good  will  of  all  his  as- 
sociates in  life. 


:u 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


GODFREY,     Horace    Truman,    6th 

Bishop  of  the  Union  Ward,  East  Jor- 
dan Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  1,  1883,  in  South  Cotton- 
wood, Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  James  Godfrey  and  Fanny  Jones. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  5,  1891,  by 
Louis  A.  Kelch,  and  was  raised  and 
educated  in  South  Cottonwood  and 
took  an  active  part  in  Church  matters 
from  his  early  youth,  being  ordained 
to  different  offices  in  the  Holy  Priest- 
hood. He  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1903-1906,  laboring  in  the 
Newcastle  and  later  in  the  Bristol 
Conference.  At  home  he  acted  as 
president  of  an  Elders  quorum  while 
residing  in  South  Cottonwood,  where 
he  also  functioned  as  superintendent 
of  the  ward  Sunday  school  and  pres- 
ident of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
also  served  on  the  Sunday  School 
Board  and  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  L  A.  of 
the  Granite  Stake.  For  some  years 
he  was  a  president  of  the  72nd  Quo- 
rum of  Seventy  and  later  a  president 
of  the  33rd  Quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
was  also  a  member  of  the  Jordan 
Stake  High  Council  and  superintend- 
ent of  the  Union  Ward  Sunday  school. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
12,  1892,  by  Patriarch  Hyrum  G. 
Smith.  In  February,  1907,  he  married 
Lucy  Bringhurst  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,  which  union  has  been  blessed 
with  seven  children,  namely,  Arthur 
James,  Ella,  La  True,  Willard  Horace, 
Alice,  Lucy,  and  Seymour  John.  Bish- 
op Godfx'ey  is  by  avocation  a  farmer 
and  dairyman. 

MARLINE,  Oscar  Joseph,  2nd  Bish- 
op of  the  Hillcrest  Ward  (Grant 
Stake),  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  27,  1891,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Carl  Harline  and  Mathilda 
Johanna  Peterson.  He  was  raised  and 
educated  in  the  Salt  Lake  City  public 
schools,  in  the  L.  D.  S.  high  school 
and  later  at  the  L.  D.  S.  business  col- 
lege in  Salt  Lake  City.  Soon  after 
his  baptism,  Aug.  27,  1899,  he  became 
an  active  Church  worker  and  was  or- 


dained successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest,  Elder,  High 
Priest  and  Bishop.  He  acted  as  a 
president  of  the  Deacons  quorum  and 
later  as  president  of  a  Teachers  quo- 
rum in  the  Wilford  Ward;  also  as  sec- 
retary of  the  Priests  quorum.  After 
being  ordained  an  Elder  by  Levi  North, 


he  filled  a  mission  to  California  in 
1913-1915,  and  acted  as  secretary  of 
the  California  Mission  for  21  months. 
After  returning  from  his  mission,  he 
labored  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Granite  Stake,  and  as  a  special  mis- 
sionary to  visit  non-members  of  the 
Church  in  the  Wilford  Ward,  where 
he  resided  from  his  early  youth,  and 
where  he  acted  as  supervisor  of  the 
lesser  Priesthood,  and  as  ward  clerk 
for  five  years.  In  1917  (Aug.  27) 
he  married  Lorena  Le  Cheminent  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple  (the  daughter 
of  Oscar  Le  Cheminent  and  Hannah 
Davis,  born  July  25,  1890).  Following 
are  the  names  of  the  children  by  this 
marriage:  Osmond,  Alden,  Glenden, 
Wesley,  Richard  and  Dawn  Etta.  For 
a  number  of  years  Brother  Harline 
was  a  teacher  in  an  Elders  quorum,  a 
Sunday  school  officer,  etc.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Apostle 
John  A.  Widtsoe  and  set  apart  as  a 
High    Councilor    in    the    Grant    Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


31 


which  position  he  held  until  Nov.  10, 
1925,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  Richard  R.  Lyman  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Hillcrest 
Ward,  which  position  he  still  holds. 
The  main  avocations  of  Bishop  Harline 
are  those  of  a  bookkeeper  and  account- 
ant. 

HOGGE,     Charles     Alexander,    8th 

Bishop  of  Eden,  Ogden  Stake,  Weber 
Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  16,  1886,  in 
West  Weber,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  William  George  Hogge  and 
Margaret  Ann  Ririe.  He  was  raised 
and  schooled  in  West  Weber,  and  also 
attended  the  Weber  Academy  one 
year.  In  1910-1911,  while  still  a 
resident   of  West   Weber,   he   filled   a 


mission  to  the  Western  States,  sup- 
porting himself  from  the  first  |1,200 
he  ever  saved.  On  this  mission  he 
labored  in  North  and  South  Dakota, 
Nebraska  and  Colorado.  After  return- 
ing from  his  mission  he  located  in 
Eden,  where  he  acted  as  superintend- 
ent of  the  Eden  Sunday  School  about 
four  years.  In  1915  (June  23),  he 
married  Lyda  Fuller  of  Eden  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple,  which  union  has 
been  blessed  with  six  children,  viz., 
Leah  Marelda,  Melvin  Alex,  Donna 
Margaret,   Ethel    Mary,   Floyde   Dean 


and  Elmer  Morris.  Prior  to  being 
chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Eden  Ward 
Dec.  18,  1927,  he  acted  as  ward  clerk 
from  1919  to  1927.  He  received  his 
ordinations  to  the  Priesthood  in  the 
following  oi'der:  Ordained  a  Deacon 
April  15,  1900,  an  Elder  April  14, 
1907,  by  Nathan  Hawkes,  sen.,  a  Sev- 
enty Jan.  30,  1910,  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball, and  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  18,  1927,  by  David  O.  McKay. 
Bishop  Hogge  has  also  been  active  in 
secular  affairs.  For  four  years  he 
presided  over  the  Eden  Irrigation 
Company,  and  at  present  is  a  director 
of  the  Eden  Water  System  and  Irriga- 
tion Company.  Besides  this,  he  has 
filled  many  minor  positions  of  honor 
and  responsibility  in  the  midst  of  the 
community  in  whose  interests  he  has 
constantly  been  laboring.  As  a  Bish- 
op and  otherwise  as  a  leader  of  men, 
he  wields  an  influence  for  good  and 
points  to  success  in  all  his  walks  of 
life. 

HOOPER,  John  Douglas,  5th  Bish- 
op of  the  Hooper  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Weber  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  10, 
1873,  in  Hooper,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  W.  Hooper  and  Elizabeth 
Ann  Douglas.  He  was  baptized  June 
1,  1882,  by  Thomas  S.  Johnston,  and 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon  and  Elder.  In  his  early  youth 
he  took  an  active  part  in  the  Hooper 
Sunday  school  and  Y.  M.  M,  I.  A. 
After  being  ordained  a  Seventy  April 
8,  1895,  by  Apostle  Franklin  D. 
Richards,  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Hawaii  in  1895-1898.  After  his  return 
to  America  he  labored  as  an  assistant 
to  Wm.  Waddoups  among  the  Hawa- 
iians  at  losepa.  Skull  Valley,  and  in 
1915-1918,  he  filled  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land. In  1899  (Dec.  21),  he  married 
Ellen  Child,  daughter  of  Bishop  Wil- 
liam W.  Child,  which  marriage  hi^s 
been  blessed  with  five  children,  name- 
ly, John  Child,  Ruth  Child,  Irene 
Child,  Afton  Child,  and  Jennie  Child. 
His  wife  died  April  26,  1912,  and  on 
Jan.    8,    1919,   he   married   Joanna   M. 


32 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Weaver.  There  are  no  children  from 
this  marriage.  Bishop  Hooper  is  a 
farmer  and  salesman  by  avocation, 
and  besides  filling  a  number  of  ec- 
clesiastical positions  he  has  acted  as 
deputy  sheriff,  school  trustee,  member 
of  the  Board  of  Education  in  Weber 
County,  and  also  as  secretary  of  the 
Weber  River  Water  Users  Association. 
As  a  man  of  affairs  Bishop  Hooper 
has  made  a  fine  record,  both  in  ec- 
clesiastical and  financial  service. 

HYDE,  P>ank,  6th  Bishop  of  Kays- 
ville  Ward,  North  Davis  Stake,  Davis 
Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  25,  1881,  in 
Kaysville,  Utah,  the  son  of  Rosel 
Hyde  and  Hannah  Maria  Simmons. 
He  was  baptized  April  1,  1889,  by 
Wm.  Blood,  was  raised  a  farmer  and 
educated  in  the  common  schools  of 
Kaysville.  He  took  an  active  part  in 
Church  matters  from  his  early  youth, 
receiving  instructions  from  his  par- 
ents both  by  example  and  precept. 
Early  in  life  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
and  on  Jan.  26,  1896,  ordained  a 
Teacher;  later  he  was  ordained  a 
Priest,  and  on  Jan.  10,  1904,  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  John  C.  Jame- 
son. He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
J.  Golden  Kimball  March  13,  1910,  and 
became  a  member  and  later  a  presi- 
dent of  the  55th  Quorum  of  Seventy, 
which  position  he  held  until  Aug.  8, 
1915,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Higli 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle  Francis 
M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Kaysville  Ward.  Prior  to 
this  he  acted  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Kaysville  Sunday 
school  No.  3,  and  later  as  superin- 
tendent for  two  years  of  the  same 
school.  Bishop  Hyde  has  also  held 
a  number  of  secular  offices  in  the 
community  and  served  as  a  member 
\of  the  Kaysville  City  Council  from 
1017  to  1921.  In  1904  (May  25),  he 
married  Winnifred  Barnes  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  which  union  has  been 
blessed  with  four  children,  viz., 
Lucille,  Helen  R.,  Ruth  and  Noall 
Frank.      Bishop   Hyde   is   a   carpenter 


by  trade,  and  for  18  years  he  has  been 
engaged  in  contracting  and  building 
in  northern  Utah  and  southern  Idaho. 
On  June  29,  1921,  he  met  with  an 
accident  while  driving  a  team  on  the 
state  highway,  near  Kaysville,  being- 
run  into  by  an  automobile.  From  this 
accident  he  came  out  with  a  broken 
leg,  a  broken  arm  and  a  broken 
shoulder  and  ribs;  his  life  was  de- 
spaired of,  but  by  the  power  of  God 
and  the  administration  of  the  Priest- 
hood he  was  restored  to  perfect  health. 
Bishop  Hyde  ascribes  this  miraculous 
case  of  healing  to  the  fact  that  he  has 
kept  the  Word  of  Wisdom  from  his 
early  youth. 

JAYNES,  Arzie  Henry,  ward  clerk 
of  the  Crescent  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Dec.  14,  1892,  at  Murray,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Frederick  D. 
Jaynes  and  Ida  A.  Atwood.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  7,  1904,  by  James  P. 
Jensen,  jun.,  who  also  ordained  him 
a  Deacon  Sept.  6,  1906,  and  a  Teacher, 
Dec.  9,  1907.  He  was  ordained  a 
Priest  Aug.  11,  1911,  by  Lawrence  E. 
Nelson,  an  Elder  Oct.  7,  1912,  by  Bish- 
op Wm.  Fairbourn,  and  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  16,  1916,  by  Apostle  Francis  M. 
Ijyman.  He  acted  as  second  counselor 
to  William  Fairbourn  of  the  Crescent 
Ward  from  Aug.  6,  1916,  until  the 
death  of  Bishop  Fairbourn  Aug.  4, 
1918.  In  1912-1916  he  filled  a  mission 
to  Tonga,  'r5r  the  Friendly  Islands, 
during  which  he  acquired  a  good 
knowledge  of  the  Tongan  language, 
enabling  him  to  speak  freely  both  in 
public  and  in  private.  In  1918  (Oct. 
3),  he  married  Mary  Ellen  Hardcastle, 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  which  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  four  chil- 
dren (two  sons  and  two  daughters), 
namely,  Arzie  Lynn,  Theron  Hard- 
castle, Rella  and  Luana. 

At  home  Elder  Jaynes  has  held 
many  local  Church  positions  and  on 
Dec.  21,  1924,  he  was  chosen  and  set 
apart  as  ward  clerk  in  the  Crescent 
Ward,   which    position   he    still   holds. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


33 


Bro.  Jaynes  has  been  a  resident  of 
Cresent  Ward  since  1903  and  is  a 
farmer  by  occupation. 

JEFFERY.  Edgar  Wallace,  Bishop 
of  the  Delta  1st  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Millard  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  April 
9,  1873,  on  Santa  Clara  Creek, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Alfred  Jeflfery  and  Elizabeth 
Cowper.  He  was  baptized  April  11, 
1881,  soon  after  Avhich  the  family 
moved  to  Pine  Valley,  where  he  re- 
ceived a  common  school  education 
and  was  ordained  a  Deacon  Jan.  26, 
1885.  Nine  years  later,  he  moved 
with  his  father's  family  to  Loa,  now 
in  Wayne  County,  Utah,  where  he 
acted  as  president  of  a  Deacons  quo- 
rum, was  ordained  a  Teacher,  and 
later  ordained  an  Elder  by  Joseph 
Eckersley  Nov.  24,  1895.  A  week 
later  (Dec.  2,  1895),  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Seymour  B.  Young  and 
became  a  member  of  the  112th  Quo- 
rum of  Seventy.  In  1896  he  was  taken 
.sick  with  diphtheria,  followed  by 
paralysis,  and  was  confined  to  his  bed 
for  five  months.  At  Loa  he  acted  as 
an  officer  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  L  A.,  and 
in  1897-1899  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  laboring  mostly  in 
the  States  of  Mississippi  and  Ken- 
tucky. During  his  absence  on  this 
mission,  his  father  died.  The  two 
following  winters  Bro.  Jeffery  spent 
at  school  studying  in  the  Snow  Acad- 
emy at  Ephraim,  Sanpete  Co.  In 
1902  (June  18),  he  married  Clara  E. 
Hanson  in  the  Manti  Temple.  In 
1901  he  was  appointed  superintendent 
of  the  Loa  Sunday  school,  which  posi- 
tion be  held  3 '  _-  years,  after  which 
he  acted  as  stake  Sunday  school  su- 
perintendent in  the  Wayne  Stake.  In 
1904  he  was  chosen  as  one  of  the 
presidents  of  the  112th  Quorum  of 
Seventy,  which  position  he  held  until 
he  moved  to  Millard  County  in  1906. 
In  1907,  after  the  death  of  his  mother, 
he  settled  in  Hinckley,  and  in  1908 
he  became  a  resident  of  Delta, 
where    he    still    resides.      When    the 


Burterner  Branch  was  organized  as 
the  Delta  Ward  Oct.  19,  1909,  Bro. 
Jeffery  was  chosen  as  first  counselor 
to  Bishop  Hiett  E.  Maxfield,  being  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.  He  held  that  position  about 
11  years.  In  1921  to  1923  he  filled 
a  second  mission,  this  time  in  Great 
Britain,  laboring  first  in  the  London 
and  later  in  the  Birmingham  Con- 
ference, most  of  the  time  as  president 
of  the  latter  conference.  When  the 
Delta  Ward  was  divided  in  March, 
1924,  he  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the 
Delta  1st  Ward,  being  ordained  and 
set  apart  to  that  position  March  22, 
1924,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith,  with  Ed- 
ward Eugene  Gardner  as  first  and 
Edwin  Delile  Knight  as  second  coun- 
selor. His  wife  died  Aug.  28,  1925, 
while  his  son  was  filling  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States.  She  bore  her 
husband  four  children,  namely,  Wal- 
lace Truman,  Ruth,  Elizabeth  and 
Emily.  Elizabeth  died  with  pneu- 
monia when  three  years  old.  In  1927 
(June  9),  Bishop  Jeffery  married 
Nancy  Ethel  Hale  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  Bishop  Jeffery  is  a  farmer 
by  occupation  and  is  a  highly  re- 
spected citizen  of  Millard  County. 

JENKINS,  John  Howard,  1st  Bish- 
op of  the  Ogden  13th  Ward,  Ogden 
Stake,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  1,  1886,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  Jenkins  and  Harriet  Riley. 
He  was  raised  and  received  a  good 
education  in  the  schools  of  Ogden. 
After  being  baptized  Oct.  4,  1894,  by 
William  Moyes,  he  began  his  Church 
activities,  and  was  ordained  a  Teacher 
Dec.  2,  1901,  by  Bishop  Robert  Mc- 
Quarrie;  ordained  a  Priest  Oct.  13, 
1902,  by  Warren  G.  Child,  and  ordain- 
ed an  Elder  June  4,  1906,  by  Thomas 
Samuel  Browning.  After  laboring  as 
a  Sunday  school  teacher,  he  was  called 
to  fill  a  mission  to  New  Zealand, 
where  he  did  missionary  labor  in 
1906-1910,  laboring  among  the  Maoris 
of  the  Wanganui  and  Taranaki  con- 
ferences.     He    was   conference    presi- 


Vol.   IV.  No.  3 


July,   1932 


34 


T.ATTER-DAY  SAINT 


dent  for  nearly  three  years  and  opened 
up  the  Taranaki  district  for  active 
missionary  work;  he  assisted  to  har- 
vest the  first  crop  on  the  Maori  agri- 
cultural farm  at  Hastings,  Hawkes 
Bay.  After  his  return  home  from 
this  mission,  he  acted  as  Sunday 
school  superintendent  of  the  Ogden 
2nd    Ward    for    two    vears.      In    1912 


(Nov.  20),  he  married  Athleen  Woods, 
granddaughter  of  Parley  P.  Pratt,  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  Barbara  and 
Marion  were  the  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage. Brother  Jenkins  acted  as  pres- 
ident of  the  1st  Quorum  of  Elders 
in  the  Ogden  Stake  from  1913  to  1916, 
and  was  superintendent  of  the  State 
Industrial  Sunday  school  from  1913 
to  1916.  During  a  temporary  resi- 
dence in  Idaho,  he  assisted  in  opening 
up  the  townsite  of  Pingree,  and  took 
u))  a  quarter  section  of  land  there.  Re- 
turning to  Ogden,  he  became  an  em- 
ployee in  the  Fred  J.  Kiesel  Company, 
and  later  worked  for  J.  G.  Read  and 
Brothers,  with  which  company  he  now 
holds  the  position  of  treasurer  and 
director.  When  the  Ogden  13th  Ward 
was  organized  from  parts  of  the  4th 
and  6th  Wards,  he  was  called  to  act 
as  Bishop  of  the  13th  Ward,  where  he 
took  a  leading  part  in  the  erection  of 
a  frame  building  as  a  temporary  meet- 


ing house  and  later  directed  the  build- 
ing of  the  present  modern  13th  Ward 
chapel.  His  wife  died  Nov.  30,  1^j18, 
and  on  Dec.  10,  1919,  he  married  Cora 
Stephenson  (who  had  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1917-1919) 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  The  chil- 
dren of  this  marriage  are  Donr.a, 
John  Stephenson  and  Joseph  Richard, 
born   in   Auckland,  New  Zealand. 

In  April,  1925,  Bro.  Jenkins  was 
called  on  a  second  mission  to  Xt;w 
Zealand,  this  time  to  succeed  Angus 
T.  Wright  as  president  of  the  New 
Zealand  Mission.  He  was  accom- 
panied on  this  mission  by  his  wife, 
Cora,  who  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Relief  Societies  in  the  Mission. 
During  this  mission  Pres.  Jenkins  was 
busy  organizing  and  I'e-organizing 
branches  of  the  Church  among  the 
Maoris  and  Europeans.  Under  his 
administration,  a  recreation  hall  was 
finished  at  Nuhaka,  and  he  superin- 
tended the  transfer  of  the  meeting- 
house properties  in  New  Zealand  to 
the  Church;  and  also  brought  the  mis- 
sion out  of  debt.  Three  general  con- 
ferences of  the  mission  were  held 
during  his  administration,  two  of 
them  at  the  invitation  of  Princtss 
Puea  Te  HeRangi  at  her  model  man- 
sion on  the  Waikato  River.  Since 
June,  1928,  Brother  Jenkins  has  acted 
as  a  member  of  the  Ogden  Stake  High 
Council. 

JENSEN,  James  .Marinus,  2nd  Bi.-h- 
op  of  the  Manavu  Ward,  Utah  Stake, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  July  11, 
1868,  at  Provo,  Utah,  the  son  of  Peter 
C.  Jensen  and  Anna  Katrine  Olsen. 
He  was  baptized  in  March,  1877,  by 
John  E.  Booth  at  Provo,  and  ordained 
a  Priest  by  Sidney  A.  Pace  in  the 
Provo  2nd  Ward,  June  12,  1884.  Later, 
on  April  2,  1891,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder,  and  for  several  years  he  acted 
as  president  of  the  Elders  Quorum  of 
the  Provo  2nd  Ward.  From  his  ear- 
liest youth  he  took  an  active  part  in 
Church  matters,  and  on  Oct.  16,  l>>'i, 
he   was   appointed   assistant   librarian 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


35 


of  the  Provo  2nd  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
He  also  acted  as  secretary  and  later 
as  president  of  said  organization.  As 
a  Sunday  school  officer,  he  has  been 
active  for  many  years.  Thus  from 
18i)0  to  1893  he  acted  as  a  Sunday 
school  teacher,  assistant  superintend- 
ent of  the  Pi'ovo  2nd  Ward  Sunday 
school  from  1893  to  1898,  and  as  su- 
perintendent from  1898  to  1903.  As 
a  promoter  of  religion  class  work,  he 
acted  as  assistant  superintendent  in 
the  stake  religion  class  organization 
from  1899  to  1903,  as  superintendent 
of  religion  classes  in  Provo  2nd  Ward 
from  1902  to  1904  and  later  as  stake 
superintendent  of  religion  classes.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  April  20, 
1902,  by  Lafayette  Holbrook  of  the 
Utah  Stake  presidency,  and  acted  as 
counselor  to  Bishop  Lars  L.  Nelson 
in  the  Provo  2nd  Ward  from  1902  to 
1912.  After  moving  to  the  Provo 
5th  Ward,  he  acted  as  president  of  the 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  Utah  Stake  from 
1913  to  1924.  While  a  student  at 
Stanford  University  in  1924-1925,  he 
acted  as  Sunday  school  superintendent 
at  Palo  Alto,  Calif.,  and  from  March 
14,  1896,  to  May  18,  1930,  he  acted 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Nephi  An- 
derson of  the  Manavu  Ward,  Provo, 
or  until  he  was  chosen  and  sustained 
as  Bishop  of  said  ward,  which  position 
he  still  occupies.  Bishop  Jensen  com- 
menced his  school  career  in  the  public 
schools  of  Provo,  but  spent  the  greater 
part  of  his  time  at  the  Brigham  Young 
Academy  (later  University),  from 
which  institution  he  took  the  degree 
of  bachelor  of  pedagogy  in  1903  and 
bachelor  of  arts  in  1913.  As  a  student 
at  the  University  of  Chicago  he  took 
a  master  of  arts  degree  in  1919.  Later 
he  attended  summer  sessions  in  the 
University  of  California  (in  1920),  at- 
tended the  Stanford  University  one 
year  (1924-1925)  and  the  Columbia 
University  in  the  summer  of  1928. 
He  served  as  a  reporter  on  the  start 
of  the  "Provo  Enquire)-''  and  was  cor- 
respondent    to     various     newspapers 


about  three  years.  In  1894  he  com- 
menced teaching  in  the  public  schools 
of  Provo  and  continued  thus  until 
1910,  when  he  became  a  teacher  at 
the  Brigham  Young  University,  where 
he  now  holds  the  position  of  asso- 
ciate professor  in  English.  He  is  the 
author  of  the  History  of  Provo,  which 
was  published  in  1925.  Of  secular 
public  positions  held  by  Bishop  Jensen 
it  may  be  mentioned  that  he  served 
one  term  as  city  recorder,  a  number 
of  years  as  clerk  of  the  board  of  edu- 
cation, has  been  a  member  of  the 
Provo  City  Civil  Service  Commission, 
a  member  of  the  Provo  City  Council 
four  years,  member  and  president  of 
the  Provo  City  Library  Board  about 
ten  years,  etc. 

In  1892  (Sept.  22),  he  married  Eliza 
Emmeline  Strong  of  Alpine,  Utah,  in 
the  Manti  Temple.  Esther  Reese 
Keeler  is  his  adopted  daughter. 

JENSEN,  Niels  Peter,  3rd  Bishop 
of  the  Preston  Ward,  Nevada  Stake, 
White  Pine  Co.,  Nevada,  was  born 
Nov.  4,  186S,  in  Moroni,  Sanpete  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jens  Jensen  and 
Kirsten  Marie  Hansen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  23,  1877,  by  Lars  N.  Lar- 
sen  in  Moroni,  where  he  was  raised 
and  educated.  In  1881  (Oct.  4),  he 
married  Ida  Lauritzen,  daughter  of 
Lauritz  Lauritzen  and  Matilda  D. 
Johnson,  in  the  Manti  Temple,  which 
union  was  blessed  with  three  children, 
namely,  Matilda,  Clarence  Peter  and 
Devona  Marie.  After  serving  for  sev- 
eral years  in  the  lesser  Priesthood, 
Bro.  Jensen  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1901,  by  Apostle  Anthon  H. 
Lund  and  filled  a  mission  to  Denmark 
in  1909-1911,  laboring  in  the  Copen- 
hagen Conference,  part  of  the  time 
on  Bornholm.  In  1900  he  moved  to 
Nevada,  where  his  wife  died  May  20, 
1905.  Seven  years  later  (Feb.  9,  1912) 
he  married  Jensiiie  Marie  Jensen 
(daughtei-  of  Jorgen  Peter  Jensen  and 
Ellen  Margrette  Jensen)  in  the  Manti 
Temple.  This  .second  marriage  has 
been     blessed     with     three     children. 


36 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


namely,  James  George,  Ida  Margaret 
and  Elsa  Kirsten.  After  his  arrival 
in  Nevada,  Bro.  Jensen  took  an  active 
part  in  the  founding  and  upbuilding 
of  the  town  of  Preston,  where  he  has 
since  resided.  From  1901-1906,  he 
acted  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Arnoldsen  and  from  1912-1918  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Bishop  Christian 
Hermansen.  He  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op of  the  Preston  Ward  Sept.  22,  1918, 
by  Apostle  David  O.  McKay,  and 
served  in  that  capacity  until  Sept.  19, 
1926,  after  which  he  served  for  three 
years  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil of  the  Nevada  Stake.  Bishop  Jen- 
sen is  a  farmer  by  avocation  and  is 
also  engaged  in  merchandising.  His 
wives  have  taken  an  active  part  with 
him  in  his  ecclesiastical  and  secular 
affairs,  which  has  contributed  mucli 
toward  making  hi.s  career  as  a  publir 
officer  successful. 

JOHNSON,  Race  Alphalus,  2n(l 
Bishop  of  the  Beaver  Ward,  Bear 
River  Stake,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born  Oct.  4,  1865,  at  Brigham  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jarvis  Johnson  (of 
Mormon  Battalion  fame)  and  Sarah 
Jane  Angell.  He  was  raised  and 
schooled  in  Brigham  City  and  Wash- 
akie, and  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Beaver  Dam  in  1882,  where  he  has 
resided  ever  since,  and  where  his 
father  died  Jan.  28,  1898.  Brother 
Johnson  was  baptized  when  about  K 
years  old,  ordained  a  Deacon  Dec.  2."5. 
1S83,  by  Francillo  Durfey,  ordained  an 
Elder  March  25,  1888,  by  John  C. 
Dewey,  ordained  a  Seventy  June  26, 
1906,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
1,  1907,  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Beaver 
Ward,  which  position  he  occupied  until 
July  28,  1929.  Prior  to  this  (1901  to 
1906)  he  had  acted  as  superintendent 
of  the  Beaver  Ward  Sunday  School. 
In  1888  (March  28),  he  married  Char- 
lotte Marie  Whitworth  of  Calls  Fort, 
Bo.x  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  in  the  Logan 
Temple.     The   following  children   are 


the  issue  of  this  marriage:  Pearl 
(deceased),  Mary  Lavona,  Veda  (de- 
ceased), Alphus  Ariel,  Florence,  Mar- 
tha Fern  (deceased),  Catherine, 
George,  Charlotte,  Alice  Virginia  (de- 
ceased), Benjamin  Francis  and  Afton. 
In  1906-1907,  Bishop  Johnson  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  labor- 
ing in  the  South  West  Virginia  Con- 
ference, and  was  called  home  to  suc- 
ceed Francillo  Durfey  as  Bishop  of 
Beaver  Ward.     Prior  to  being  called 


to  the  bishopric,  he  took  an  active 
part  in  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
other  Church  organizations.  He  acted 
as  justice  of  the  peace,  school  trustee, 
member  of  the  committee  which  super- 
intended the  erection  of  the  Bear 
River  Stake  tabernacle  at  Garland; 
was  foreman  of  a  committee  to  secure 
electric  lights  and  water  works  and  a 
grist  mill  at  Beaver  Dam,  and  also  to 
get  a  pumping  plant  to  pump  water 
out  of  the  Hammond  Canal  from  Bear 
River,  thus  furnishing  irrigation 
water  for  500  acres  of  land  in  the 
lower  end  of  Beaver  Ward.  Bishop 
Johnson  is  a  farmer  and  stock-raiser 
by  avocation. 

JOHNSTON,      David      Aaron.     4th 

Bishop  of  the  Clinton  Ward,  Weber 
vStake,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  9,   1893,  in  Hooper,  Weber  Co., 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


37 


Utah,  the  son  of  James  Johnston  and 
Ellen  E.  Pinney.  He  was  baptized 
July  6,  1902,  by  Oley  Oleson  at 
Hooper,  confirmed  by  A.  C.  Chris- 
tensen,  and  spent  his  early  life  on 
a  farm.  When  about  12  years  old 
he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  and  later 
became  president  of  a  Deacons  quo- 
rum at  Hooper.  When  he,  at  the  age 
of  15  years,  was  ordained  a  Teacher, 
he  acted  as  president  of  a  Teachers 
quorum.  Two  years  later,  when  17 
years  old,  he  was  ordained  a  Priest. 
When  his  father  died,  David,  being 
the  oldest  boy  in  the  family,  assumed 
the  responsibility  of  taking  care  of 
his  father's  family,  and  helped  his 
mother  to  raise  the  younger  children. 
After  being  ordained  an  Elder  by 
James  R.  Beus  Nov.  9,  1913,  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northwestern  States 
under  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  traveling 
without  purse  or  scrip  about  8  months 
in  the  state  of  Washington  and  Brit- 
ish Columbia,  Canada.  He  returned 
from  this  mission  Dec.  23,  1915.  In 
1917  (Nov.  21),  he  married  Ivy  Man- 
ning, which  union  has  been  blessed 
with  six  children,  five  boys  and  one 
girl,  viz.,  David  Leon,  James  Manning, 
John  Earl,  Melvin  Fred,  Elwood  Stew- 
art, and  Ivy  Jeannine.  Bro.  Johnston 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  22,  1927, 
by  Apostle  Melvin  J.  Ballard  and 
afterwards  acted  as  one  of  the  pres- 
idents of  the  170th  Quorum  of  Seventy. 
He  also  acted  on  the  stake  Sunday 
school  board  of  the  Weber  Stake  IVz 
years,  or  until  June  8,  1930,  when  he 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Clinton 
Ward.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  29,  1930,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney.  Bishop  Johnston  is  a 
farmer  by  occupation,  but  taught 
school  from  1919-1920  and  from  1922- 
1923.  He  is  the  owner  of  a  good  farm 
and  has  lived  upon  it  for  many  years. 
At  present  he  acts  as  an  agricultural 
superintendent  of  the  Hooper  Sugar 
Factory  at  Hooper  and  the  Smith 
Canning  Company  at  Clearfield.  As 
a  Bishop  and  financier,  Bishop  Johns- 
ton has  been  active  and  successful. 


KOTTER,  Henry  John,  7th  Bishop 
of  the  Elsinore  Ward,  South  Sevier 
Stake,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
July  1,  1887,  in  Elsinore,  Utah,  the 
son  of  August  Kotter  and  Margaret 
May  Madsen.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
1,  1895,  by  his  father,  was  raised  and 
schooled  in  Elsinore,  and  attended 
High  School  in  the  L.  D.  S.  College 
in  Salt  Lake  City  during  the  years 
1906-1908.  Taking  an  active  part  in 
Church  affairs  from  his  early  youth, 
he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  in  1899,  a 
Teacher  in  1904,  and  an  Elder  April 
12,  1908,  by  Milan  A.  Hutchings.  In 
1908-1910  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States,  laboring  principally 
in  western  Iowa  and  Wisconsin.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Apostle 
Francis  M.  Lyman  Dec.  18,  1910,  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to  Bish- 
op Jens  I.  Jensen.  On  May  21,  1911, 
he  was  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Joseph  L.  Staples.  In  1913 
(Jan.  15)  he  married  Ella  Louise 
Peterson  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
One  child  (Evelyn  Marie)  was  the 
issue  of  this  marriage.  His  wife  died 
Feb.  5,  1916,  and  on  Sept.  12,  1917,  he 
married  Clara  Ramsay.  This  union 
has  been  blessed  with  four  children  (3 
boys  and  1  girl),  viz.,  James  Roger, 
Marilyn,  Ralph  Henry  and  John  Burke. 
Brother  Kotter  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Ernest  M.  Green- 
wood Feb.  11,  1917,  and  on  June  1, 
1919,  he  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Joseph  L.  Staples.  On 
Jan.  30,  1921,  he  was  set  apart  as  a 
member  of  the  South  Sevier  Stake 
High  Council,  and  on  Feb.  8,  1925, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Elsinore  Ward,  which 
position  he  still  occupies.  Bishop  Kot- 
ter has  filled  many  secular  positions 
in  the  community;  among  others  he 
served  as  president  of  the  town  board 
of  Elsinore  two  terms  (1916-1918  and 
1924-1926).  From  1912  to  1917  he 
served  as  ward  clerk.  Brother  Kot- 
ter is  a  farmer  by  avocation,  and 
takes  an  active  part  in  all  ecclesi- 
astical and  secular  affairs  in  his  ward. 


38 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


LARSON,  John  William,  1st  Bishop 
of    East    Garland    Ward,    Bear    River 
Stake,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Feb,    21,    1873,    in    Bear    River    City, 
Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
A.  Larson  and  Keziah  L.  Larsen.     He 
was  raised   in   Bear   River   City  until 
he  was  11  years  old,  when  he  moved 
with  his  parents  in  1884  into  a  wilder- 
ness   (Bear    River    Flat),   which    now 
is  included  in  the  East  Garland  Ward 
Being    baptized    in    Bear    River    City 
April  10,  1881,  by  Niels  Christensen, 
he   was   ordained   successively   to   the 
offices   of    Deacon,   Priest,   Elder   and 
Seventy;  he  filled  a  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia in   1898-1901,  laboring  in  the 
Giiteborg    Conference.      After   return- 
ing   from    this    mission,    he    took    an 
active    part    in    the    ecclesiastical    af- 
fairs of  the  Garland  Ward,  acted  as 
assistant   superintendent  of  the   Sun- 
day school,  and  held  other  positions  ot 
responsibility.      When    East    Garland 
was   organized   as  a   branch   Feb.    14, 
1904,  he  was  called  to  act  as  presiding 
Elder  of  said  branch,  which  position 
he  held  until  Nov.  20,  1904,  when  the 
branch  was  organized  as  a  ward  with 
him   as    Bishop.      He   w^as   ordained   a 
High    Priest    and    Bishop    by    Apostle 
Rudger  Clawson,   Nov.   27,   1904,  and 
set    apart    to    preside    over    the    East 
Garland  Ward,  which  position  he  held 
until    Feb.    21,    1915.      Bishop    Larson 
is     still     an     active     member     of    the 
Church  and  is  a  man  of  influence  and 
interested   in   every   movement   w'hich 
tends   to  build   up   the  community   of 
which  he  has  been  a  resident  for  so 
many  years.    In  1901  (Dec.  18),  Bish- 
op   Larson    married    Anna    Holmberg, 
which    union    has    been    blessed    with 
seven    children,    viz.,    John    W.,    jun., 
Nellie,    Paul    S.,    D.    Conrad,    Norman 
v.,  Louis  W.,  and  Clarissa. 

LYON,  Warren  Harvey,  president  of 
the  South  African  Mission,  was  born 
May  7,  1870,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Luther  Peet  Lyon 
and  Elizabeth  Harvey  Baxter.  When 
2  years  old  he  moved  with  his  parents 


to  South  Cottonwood  (now  Murray), 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  where  he  was  baptized 
Aug.  21, 1881,  by  James  Peterson.  Tak- 
ing an  active  part  in  Church  activities 
from  his  earliest  youth  he  was  or- 
dained a  Teacher  Dec.  2,  1887,  by 
Thomas  A.  Wheeler,  ordained  a  Priest 
June  28,  1893,  by  Jo.seph  S.  Rawlins, 
and   ordained  an   Elder  Feb.   5,   1894. 


by  Daniel  B.  Jones.  In  189G  (March 
31),  he  married  Mary  Etta  Hansen 
of  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake  County;  she 
died  Dec.  22,  1902,  leaving  no  children. 
On  June  2,  1903,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Brigham  H.  Roberts,  and 
the  next  day  left  Salt  Lake  City  on 
a  mission  to  South  Africa,  together 
with  Elders  William  R.  Smith  of 
Kamas,  Summit  Co.,  and  George  A. 
Simpkins  and  Thomas  L.  Griffith  of 
Adamsville,  Beaver  Co.,  Utah.  Ac- 
cording to  appointment  Elder  Lyon, 
together  with  the  other  Elders  named, 
opened  anew  the  L.  D.  S.  Mission  in 
South  Africa,  Brother  Lyon  acting  as 
president  of  the  mission  from  June 
22,  1903,  to  April  27,  1906.  Having 
filled  a  splendid  and  successful  mis- 
sion, he  returned  to  his  home  in  Mur- 
ray in  June,  1906.  After  his  return 
he  continued  his  Church  activities  at 
home;  acted  as  ward  clerk  in  the 
Murray  First  Ward  for  11  years;  filled 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


39 


tht  position  of  assistant  superintend- 
er,t  of  the  ward  Sunday  school  and 
L^-t  counselor  in  the  presidency  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  taught  school  in 
Murray,  Granite  and  Jordan  districts, 
and  in  the  Weber  Stake  Academy.  He 
also  served  as  a  member  of  the  city 
council  in  Murray.  In  1908  (Sept. 
30),  he  married  Hannah  Welsh  Mc- 
Lachlan,  daughter  of  the  late  Pres. 
Wm.  McLachlan,  which  union  was 
blessed  with  five  children,  namely, 
Mary,  Warren  McLachlan,  Margaret 
Alice  and  Harlan  (twins),  and  Aileen. 
Bro.  Lyon  was  one  of  the  incorpora- 
tors of  the  Lyon  Drug  Company  in 
Murray  in  1909,  and  later  of  the  Beal- 
Lyon  Company  at  Overton,  Nevada, 
in  1915,  he  having  moved  to  Nevada 
in  1914.  One  of  the  chief  occupations 
in  the  life  of  Brother  Lyon  has  been 
that  of  a  school  teacher,  and  otherwise 
he  has  taken  an  active  part,  both  in 
Church  and  civil  activities  in  Salt 
Lake,  Utah,  and  Nevada.  On  June  5, 
1931,  he  became  a  member  of  the 
Moapa  Stake  High  Council  and  stake 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools, 
which  positions  he  still  holds.  He  also 
served  twelve  years  as  school  board 
member  in  Educational  District  No.  1, 
which  embraces  the  north  half  of 
Clark  County,  Nevada.  His  son,  War- 
ren M.,  has  filled  a  mission  to  Okla- 
homa. 

MARSH.  Albert,  4th  Bishop  of  the 
Alpine  Ward,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born  May  5,  1842,  at  Steeple-Ashton, 
Wiltshire,  England,  the  son  of  Isaac 
Marsh  and  Mary  Ann  Nash.  He  was 
baptized  in  England  when  about  ten 
years  old,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1854 
with  his  aunt  and  crossed  the  Atlantic 
in  the  ship  "Marshfield"  and  the  plains 
in  William  Empey's  ox  train.  He 
located  in  Alpine,  Utah  Co.,  in  the 
spring  of  1855,  and  resided  there  con- 
tinuously until  his  death.  He  en- 
dured the  trials  and  hardships  of 
pioneer  life,  participated  in  the  so- 
called  Black-Hawk  war  and  took  an 
active  part,  both  in  ecclesiastical  and 


in  civil  capacities  throughout  his  en- 
tire life.  In  the  Church  he  held  such 
positions  as  superintendent  of  the  Al- 
pine Ward  Sunday  school  for  fifteen 
years,  presided  over  the  ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  ten  years  and  acted  as  Bishop 
of  the  Alpine  Ward  fourteen  years, 
being  ordained  a  Bishop  by  the  late 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  in  1893. 
He  was  the  instigator  of  the  Old 
Folks  entertainments  in  Alpine,  the 
first  few  annual  affairs  being  held 
at  his  home.  In  municipal  affairs  he 
was  prominent  as  a  school  trustee, 
city  marshal,  member  of  the  city 
council,  member  of  an  irrigation 
company,  etc.  He  was  also  one  of 
the  most  successful  farmers  of  the 
community  and  engaged  in  mercantile 
business.  In  1868  (Feb.  15),  he  mar- 
ried Sarah  C.  Oakey  of  American 
Fork  in  the  old  Endowment  House  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  She  was  born  in  Des 
Moines,  Iowa,  Sept.  5,  1847.  This 
marriage  was  blessed  with  eleven 
children,  namely,  Mary  Lillian,  Albert, 
Elizabeth,  Joseph  F.,  Lenora,  Olive, 
Lois,  Blanch,  Reno,  Henrietta  and 
Jenetta.  Seven  of  the  children  are 
dead.  Bishop  Marsh  died  in  Alpine 
Feb.  22,  1919,  leaving  a  wife,  five 
children,  42  grandchildren  and  six 
great  grandchildren.  Bro.  Marsh  was 
universally  known  and  beloved  for 
his  honesty,  his  integrity,  his  peace- 
loving  disposition  and  his  willingness 
to  help  in  every  way  possible  to  build 
up  the  Church,  of  which  he  was  a  de- 
voted member,  and  the  community  at 
large. 

McENTIRE,    William    Rawson,    6th 

Bishop  of  the  Huntsville  Ward,  Ogden 
Stake,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  26,  1884,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the 
son  of  William  Napoleon  McEntire 
and  Olive  Ann  Rawson.  As  an  infant 
he  moved  with  his  parents  to  Harris- 
ville,  Weber  Co.,  where,  and  in  Farr 
West,  he  was  raised  and  schooled.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  8  years  old, 
and  being  born  of  goodly  parents  he 
was  raised  in  such  a  way  that  he  could 


40 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


take  part  in  religious  duties  from  his 
earliest  youth.  Thus  he  was  ordained 
successively  to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Priest,  Elder,  Seventy,  High 
Priest  and  Bishop.  He  received  his 
ordination  as  a  Seventy  from  J. 
Golden  Kimball  April  19,  1909,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Feb.  25,  1926,  by  Apostle  Stephen 
L.  Richards.  In  his  early  youth,  he 
acted  as  seci-etary  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
and  after  moving  to  Huntsville,  when 
about  19  years  old,  he  acted  as  pres- 
ident of  the  Huntsville  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  also  as  supt.  of  the  ward  Sunday 
school.  As  an  active  Seventy  he 
served  several  years  as  a  president  in 
the  75th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  In  1906 
(Sept.  26),  he  married  Rosene  M. 
Woodfield  of  North  Ogden,  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  The  children  of  this 
marriage  are  the  following:  Vir- 
ginia May,  Laura,  William  Rawson, 
Helen  Mar,  Jay  Woodfield,  and  Don 
Woodfield.  In  secular  capacities,  Bish- 
op McEntire  has  acted  as  secretary 
and  treasurer  of  the  Huntsville  Irri- 
gation Association,  and  as  a  member 
of  the  Huntsville  Town  Board.  At 
present  he  is  a  member  of  the  Weber 
County  Board  of  Education.  He  also 
has  the  distinction  of  having  been  the 
first  scout  master  of  the  Huntsville 
Ward,  and  as  such  gave  the  boys  of 
Huntsville  some  of  their  first  lessons 
in  scout  work.  For  twenty  years  he 
kept  a  barber  shop  in  Huntsville  and 
later  engaged  in  merchandising.  He 
has  also  done  considerable  farming. 
Throughout  his  life  so  far  he  has  been 
active  in  all  affairs  pertaining  to  the 
welfare  of  the  community  in  which 
he  resides. 

MATTHEWS,  Percy  George,  Bish- 
op of  the  Evanston  Ward,  Woodruff 
Stake,  in  Uinta  Co.,  Wyoming,  was 
born  May  14,  1877,  at  Newton  Abbot, 
Devonshire,  England,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Henry  Matthews  and  Emiline 
Edmunds.  His  parents  were  convert- 
ed to  "Mormonism"  in  England  and 
young  Percy  at  the  age  of  seven  years 


emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Utah  in 
the  year  1885,  crossing  the  Atlantic 
on  the  steamship  "Nevada."  The  fam- 
ily located  in  Taylorsville,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  where  Percy  was  baptized 
and  confirmed  in  March,  1886,  by 
Elder  Samuel  H.  Bringhurst.  From 
his  early  youth  he  was  always  inter- 
ested and  active  in  Church  matters, 
and  soon  after  being  ordained  a  Dea- 


con he  presided  over  the  Deacons 
quorum  in  Taylorsville.  Up  to  the 
time  of  taking  up  his  residence  in 
Evanston,  Wyoming,  in  1897,  his  prin- 
cipal work  was  farming  and  brick- 
making;  he  was  also  employed  at 
times  at  the  smelters  in  Murray,  Utah. 
On  Sept.  28,  1899,  he  married  Lillian 
L.  Burdett,  a  native  of  Evanston, 
Wyo.,  James  Brown,  Bishop  of  Evan- 
ston Ward,  officiating.  Mrs.  Matthews 
is  the  daughter  of  James  Burdett  and 
Sarah  Jane  Lethbridge,  and  was  born 
in  Evanston,  June  23,  1878,  her  par- 
ents having  formerly  become  converts 
to  "Mormonism"  in  England.  Bishop 
and  Mrs.  Matthews  are  the  parents 
of  eleven  children,  namely,  James  Wil- 
liam, Gladys  Alma,  Sarah  Emiline, 
Frances  Lillian,  Percy  Lorenzo,  Delia 
Lucille,  Burdett  Edmund  and  Bernard 
George  (twins),  Lamar  Clarence, 
Grace  Delores  and  Melvin  J.     In  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


41 


spring-  of  1902  Bi'o.  Matthews  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
where  he  labored  in  the  Bristol- 
Cheltenham  Conference.  To  fill  this 
mission  he  took  his  departure  May  14, 
1902,  and  returned  home  July  28,  1904. 
As  a  missionary  he  was  quite  success- 
ful and  gained  the  reputation  of  being 
a  convincing  and  logical  speaker,  and 
was  the  means  of  baptizing  a  number 
of  souls  into  the  Church.  In  the  latter 
part  of  1904  he  was  set  apart  as  pres- 
ident of  the  2nd  quorum  of  Elders  in 
the  Woodruff  Stake.  In  1905  he  was 
chosen  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop  James 
Brown  in  the  Evanston  Ward  Bish- 
opric, laboring  in  that  capacity  eleven 
years,  at  the  end  of  which  time  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Orson  F.  Whitney  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Evanston  Ward, 
choosing  as  his  counselors  Cyril  C. 
Tingey  and  William  J.  Starkey.  After 
serving  as  Bishop  for  ten  years,  he 
was  called  to  act  as  a  High  Councilor 
in  the  Woodruff  Stake  and  also  as 
chairman  of  the  stake  genealogical 
committee;  both  of  these  positions  he 
still  holds,  filling  them  with  credit  and 
success. 

Since  locating  in  Evanston  he  has 
not  only  been  active  in  Church  duties, 
such  as  Sunday  school.  Mutual,  Priest- 
hood and  home  missionary  work,  but 
in  secular  affairs  he  has  been  in  the 
employ  of  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad 
Company  and  the  Dawson  and  Bur- 
dette  Mercantile  Company.  For  more 
than  twenty  years  he  has  been  en- 
gaged in  real  estate  and  fire  insurance 
business.  He  was  connected  with  the 
Evanston  post  office,  ten  years  as 
assistant  postmaster,  and  during  the 
past  ten  years  he  has  filled  the  posi- 
tion of  postmaster.  As  a  member  of 
the  Lions  Club  and  a  member  of  the 
School  Board  of  Education,  he  has 
wielded  a  weighty  influence  for  nine 
years;  he  holds  the  position  of  di- 
rectoi'. 

Mr.  Matthews  is  regarded  as  an 
enterprising,  progressive  and  sub- 
stantial citizen,  and  has  filled  various 


positions     with     marked    ability     and 
success. 

NELSON,  August  M.,  second  Bish- 
op of  the  Sandy  First  Ward,  East  Jor- 
dan Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born  Dec.  12,  1876,  at  Sandy,  the  son 
of  Matts  S.  Nilsson  and  Ellen  Larsson. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  old,  at  West  Jordan,  where  he 
also  was  ordained  a  Deacon  and  pre- 
sided over  a  Deacons  quorum.  His 
father  died  in  1880,  and  he  moved 
with  his  mother  to  Taylorsville,  later 
to  Star  Valley,  Wyo.,  and  he  finally 
became  a  permanent  settler  in  Sandy 
in  1896.  He  received  a  common  school 
education  in  West  Jordan  and  Taylors- 
ville. After  locating  in  Sandy,  he 
was  ordained  a  Teacher  and  acted  as 
president  of  a  Teachers  quorum. 
After  being  ordained  an  Elder,  he 
acted  as  a  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  the  3rd  Quorum  of  Elders  in  the 
Jordan  Stake.  He  also  presided  over 
the  Sandy  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  In 
1906-1908  he  filled  a  mission  to  Swe- 
den, laboring  in  the  Goteborg  Confer- 
ence, a  part  of  the  time  as  president 
of  the  Goteborg  Branch.  After  re- 
turning home,  he  acted  as  a  counselor 
in  the  stake  presidency  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  in  the  Jordan  Stake.  After 
being  ordained  a  Seventy  by  J.  Golden 
Kimball,  he  acted  as  a  president  of 
the  93rd  Quorum  of  Seventy  and  in 
1914  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Apostle  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Alva  J.  Butler  in  the  Sandy  Ward. 
When  Sandy  was  divided  into  three 
wards  in  November,  1920,  he  was  con- 
tinued as  counselor  ;in  the  bishopric 
of  the  Sandy  1st  Ward.  In  1921,  when 
Bishop  Butler  moved  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  Bro.  Nelson  was  chosen  as  his 
successor,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Aug.  14,  1921,  by  Apostle  George  F. 
Richards  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Sandy  1st  Ward,  which  position 
he  still  holds.  In  1906  (April  25),  he 
married  Mabel  Electa  Jensen  in  the 
Salt    Lake    Temple.      This    union    has 


42 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely,  Lucille  Roxie,  Marvin  Leo, 
Virden  James,  Raymond  August,  Ar- 
val  Joseph,  Loa  Ellen  and  Norma 
Anna.  Bishop  Nelson  is  a  contractor 
and  builder,  but  has  been  connected 
with  a  number  of  other  business  enter- 
prises. 

NEVES,     Hyrum      Lafayette,     3rd 

Bishop  of  the  Burlington  Ward,  Big 
Horn  Stake,  Wyoming,  was  born 
April  27,  1880,  at  Millville,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  William  Neves  and 
Abigail  E.  Shafer.  He  was  baptized 
June  6,  1889,  by  John  King  at  Mill- 
ville, where  he  was  schooled  and  raised 
until  14  years  of  age.  In  1894  he 
moved  to  the  Big  Horn  Basin  and 
became  one  of  the  first  settlers  at 
Burlington,  Big  Horn  Co.,  Wyoming. 
He  was  ordained  a  Deacon  when  quite 
young,  and  on  Sept.  23,  1906,  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  James  S.  Mc- 
Niven.  In  1900  (Aug.  1),  he  married 
Sarah  Eveline  Bateman,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Central  States  in  1908- 
1910,  laboring  in  the  State  of  Missouri, 
with  headquarters  at  Independence. 
Both  before  and  after  his  mission,  he 
acted  as  president  of  the  Burlington 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  when  yet  a 
boy  he  presided  over  a  Deacons  quo- 
rum. Being  ordained  a  High  Priest, 
Jan.  21,  1912,  by  Wm.  C.  Partridge  he 
acted  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
James  S.  McNiven  until  Nov.  16, 
1919,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  Melvin  J.  Ballard  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Burlington 
Ward.  In  a  secular  way  Bishop  Neves 
has  served  as  justice  of  the  peace, 
sexton,  etc.  He  is  a  popular  man  with 
both  the  "Mormon"  and  non-Mor- 
mon population,  and  is  throughout 
an  active  and  leading  citizen.  By  avo- 
cation he  is  a  farmer  and  carpenter. 

PARKER,  James  Elbert,  Bishop  of 
Joseph  Ward,  South  Sevier  Stake, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Sept,  20, 
1888,  in  Joseph,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Joseph  William  Parker  and  Margaret 


Jane  Neel.  He  was  raised  and  schooled 
in  Joseph,  and  later  attended  the  Rich- 
field High  School.  He  was  baptized 
in  1896  by  Thomas  Bryant  Parker, 
and  ordained  to  the  office  of  Deacon 
and  later  a  Priest.  He  acted  as  secre- 
tary and  later  as  first  counselor  in  a 
Deacons  quorum,  and  was  ordained 
Sept.  7,  1907,  to  the  office  of  a  Sev- 
enty, by  Peter  M.  Lundgren.  On  Nov. 
22,  1911,  he  married  Lucina  Snow  of 
Teasdaie,     Utah,     in     the     Salt    Lake 


Temple.  Following  are  the  names  of 
the  children  from  this  marriage:  Jer- 
ald  S.  (deceased),  Vernon  J.,  Iris, 
Lynn  and  Glen  (twins),  Sylvia,  Fay, 
Margaret  Mae,  Melba  Joan,  Joyce  and 
Janus  (twins).  (Glen  was  drowned 
when  30  months  old).  In  1911-1914 
Brother  Parker  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States,  laboring  28  months 
in  the  State  of  Minnesota.  At  home 
he  served  as  president  of  the  Joseph 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  in  other 
capacities.  While  residing  temporar- 
ily in  Cedar  View,  Duchesne  Co.,  Utah, 
he  presided  over  the  ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  and  at  Alunite,  a  mining  camp  in 
Piute  County,  Utah,  he  acted  as  an 
assistant  to  the  branch  president  and 
assistant  Sunday  school  superintend- 
ent. At  Leeds,  Washington  Co.,  Utah, 
he  was  an  officer  in  the  Ward  Y.  M. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


43 


M.  I.  A.  After  returning  to  Joseph 
in  1920,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  30,  1921,  by  Apostle  Richard  R. 
Lyman,  after  which  he  served  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  in  the 
South  Sevier  Stake  until  May  3,  1925, 
when  he  was  chosen  and  sustained  as 
Bishop  of  the  Joseph  Ward,  being 
ordained  to  that  position  by  Apostle 
Melvin  J.  Ballard.  Brother  Parker  is 
a  farmer  and  stock-man  by  avocation. 

PAYNE,  Harry  Lorenzo,  ord  pres- 
ident of  the  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona, 
was  born  Jan.  18,  1879,  at  Glenwood, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Harry 
M.  Pavne  and  Helen  Amelia  Buchanan. 


He  was  baptized  June  9,  1884,  by 
Daniel  Cloward,  ordained  a  Deacon 
by  William  Stevens  in  December, 
1889,  and  later  ordained  a  Priest  by 
Philip  H.  Hurst;  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Frederick  G.  Williams,  June  30, 
1897,  a  Seventy  by  Apostle  George 
Teasdale,  July  21,  1897,  and  a  High 
Priest  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  May  25, 
1902.  From  his  early  youth  he  has 
been  an  active  Church  worker.  As  a 
boy  he  served  in  the  presidency  of  a 
Deacons  quorum  and  later  became 
active  in  a  Priests  quorum.  At  the 
age  of  18,  just  prior  to  leaving  home 
for  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 


in  July,  1897,  he  was  ordained  an 
PJlder,  then,  while  visiting  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty and  set  apart  to  labor  as  a 
missionary.  He  labored  in  the  South- 
ern States  as  a  missionary  for  two 
years  (1897-1899),  in  the  states  of 
Tennessee,  Georgia  and  North  Caro- 
lina. After  his  return  from  this  mis- 
sion, he  served  in  the  stake  super- 
intendency  of  Sunday  schools.  From 
1916  to  1919  he  served  as  a  High 
Councilor  in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake  of 
Zion  and  on  Nov.  9,  1919,  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Pres. 
Andrew  Kimball.  After  the  death  of 
Pres.  Kimball  he  was  chosen  and 
sustained  as  president  of  the  St.  Jos- 
eph Stake,  Sept.  7,  1924,  by  Pres. 
Heber  J.  Grant  and  was  set  apart  for 
that  work  by  him  on  the  following 
day.  On  May  26,  1901,  he  married 
Pearl  Thurber,  which  union  was 
blessed  with  eight  children,  namely, 
Lorenzo  Cleone,  Albert  Elmo,  Gene- 
vieve, Helen,  Harry  Thurber,  Glen 
Zenatello,  Pearl  and  Ezrel  Junius. 
His  wife  died  Dec.  12,  1917,  and  on 
March  31,  1920,  he  married  Ethel 
Done,  who  bore  him  five  children, 
Ethlene,  Heber  L  a  v  o  n,  Marylin, 
Davida  and  Beth. 

Besides  being  active  in  a  Church 
capacity,  Pres.  Payne  has  taken  lead- 
ing parts  in  secular  affairs.  From 
Sevier  County,  Utah,  he  moved  to 
Colonia  Dublan,  Mexico,  1891,  where 
he  resided  till  1912,  when  he  shared 
the  fate  of  his  co-religionists  in  being- 
expelled  from  Mexico.  After  that  he 
resided  in  Richfield,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah 
In  June,  1915,  he  moved  to  Thatcher, 
Arizona;  later  he  moved  to  Safford, 
Arizona,  where  he  has  been  a  resident 
ever  since. 

Among  the  many  ecclesiastical  and 
secular  positions  which  Pres.  Payne 
has  filled  we  may  mention  that  for 
12  years  he  served  as  county  clerk  in 
Graham  County,  Arizona,  a  member 
of  the  Graham  County  committee  of 
Boy  Scouts,  president  of  the  Stake 
Board   of  education,  president  of  the 


44 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Gila  College, 
etc. 

PEART,  John  McPhail,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Woodruff  Stake  presi- 
dency, was  born  March  15,  1886,  at 
Randolph,  Rich  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
George  A.  Peart  and  Jane  McPhail. 
He  was  raised  and  educated  in  Ran- 
dolph, Utah,  where  he  was  also  or- 
dained a  Deacon  and  acted  as  secre- 
tary of  the  Deacons  quorum.  In 
1905    (Sept.    15),   he   married   Bertha 


Spencer,  by  whom  he  had  seven  chil- 
dren, namely,  five  sons  and  two 
daughters.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Richard  S.  McKinnon  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1908-1910.  After  returning  home,  he 
served  as  superintendent  of  religion 
classes  at  Randolph  and  later  as  super- 
intendent of  the  ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
In  1913  he  moved  from  Randolph  to 
Evanston,  where  he  acted  as  an  assist- 
ant to  James  Brown,  jun.,  in  the 
Evanston  Ward  Sunday  School.  Later 
he  was  second  counselor  to  Bro.  James 
Brown,  jun.,  in  the  Woodruff  Stake 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  On  July  27,  1919, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Pres  John  M.  Baxter  and  set  apart 
as  an  alternate  High  Councilor  in  the 
Woodruff   Stake.     In   1920    (Oct.   30), 


he  became  a  regular  member  of  the 
High  Council,  and  at  a  quarterly  con- 
ference held  at  Randolph  July  1,  1928, 
he  was  chosen  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  William  R.  Smith  in 
the  Woodruff  Stake  presidency.  In 
November,  1910,  he  was  elected  county 
treasurer  of  Rich  County,  Utah,  and 
he  has  filled  many  other  positions  of 
honor  and  responsibility. 

PIERCE,  Isaac  Washington,  a  Pat- 
riarch in  the  Juarez  Stake  of  Zion, 
and  a  prominent  business  man  of 
Ciudad  Juarez,  Chihuahua,  Mexico, 
was  born  Aug.  22,  1839,  in  Jackson- 
ville, Morgan  Co.,  111.,  the  son  of 
Isaac  Washington  Pierce  and  Phebe 
Baldwin.  Isaac  W.  Pierce  was  the  son 
of  Isaac  Pierce,  who  was  the  son  of 
Daniel  Pierce,  who  was  the  son  of 
Clothier  Pierce,  who  was  the  son  of 
Clothier  Pierce,  who  was  the  son  of 
John  Pierce,  who  was  the  son  of 
Michael  Pierce.  Michael  Pierce  was 
one  of  three  brothers  (Captains 
Michael  and  William,  and  their  brother 
John)  who  came  to  America  between 
the  years  1620  and  1645.  They  made 
a  number  of  trips  across  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  in  various  ships,  bringing  im- 
migrants from  the  Old  World  to  the 
New.  In  1629  Capt.  William  Pierce 
commanded  the  renowned  "Mayflower" 
with  a  company  of  immigrants  from 
Holland.  Capt.  Michael  lost  his  life 
in  defending  the  colonies  of  America 
from  attacks  of  Indians. 

The  parents  of  Isaac  Washington 
Pierce,  the  subject  of  our  sketch,  were 
reared  and  married  near  Ogdensburg, 
N.  Y.  They  joined  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  in 
the  year  1-833,  and  emigrated  from 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  to  Far  West,  Missouri, 
in  1837,  from  which  place  they  were 
driven  out  by  a  mob  of  men  opposed 
to  them  because  of  their  religious 
faith.  They  went  to  Jacksonville,  111., 
where  their  son  Isaac  was  born.  Isaac's 
only  sister,  Lucy  Ruth,  died  in  1838, 
during  the  mob  violence  of  those 
times.    His  father  was  the  first  of  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


45 


family  to  join  the  Church,  and  died 
as  a  martyr  for  his  religion,  Dec.  28, 
1841,  because  of  the  Missouri  perse- 
cutions and  privations  heaped  upon 
him.  He  left  a  widow  and  four  sons, 
namely,  Amasa,  George  Henry, 
Nathan,  and  Isaac.  While  crossing 
the  plains,  en  route  from  the  Missouri 
River  to  Utah,  with  his  mother  and 
brothers,  Isaac  was  baptized  into  the 
Church,  in  the  Platte  River,  by  Elder 
Solomon  Warren  in  August,  1852.  He 
arrived   with    his    mother's   faniilv    in 


the  Salt  Lake  Valley  Oct.  6,  1852.  He 
was  present  at  the  dedication  of  the 
ground  for  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  in 
1853,  and  during  its  construction  gave 
of  his  time  and  means,  aiding  in  erect- 
ing that  beautiful  building.  In  the 
spring  of  1854  the  family  moved  to 
Ogden,  Utah,  where  young  Isaac  made 
a  sled  and  hauled  wood  from  the  can- 
yon; he  also  made  ax-handles  and  sold 
these  for  food  for  the  family.  He 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  in  1855  by 
Bishop  Brownell.  He  went  to  Payson, 
Utah,  where  his  brother,  George,  lived, 
and  helped  guard  the  town  from  In- 
dian raids  at  the  time  of  the  so-called 
"Walker  War."  He  attended  school  in 
the  Third  and  Eighth  Wards  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  On  April  4,  1857,  he  was 
ordained    an    Elder   and   received   his 


endowments  in  the  Salt  Lake  Endow- 
ment House.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty June  14,  1857,  by  Elder  Hyrum 
Mace,  at  Fillmore,  Utah,  and  became 
a  member  of  the  42nd  Quorum  of 
Seventy.  He  was  a  Pioneer  settler 
of  Deseret,  Millard  Co.,  Utah,  in  the 
spring  of  1858,  and  helped  to  put  in 
the  first  water  dam  at  Deseret  the 
same  year.  His  mother  was  the  first 
white  woman  settler  at  Deseret.  He 
was  a  ward  teacher  in  Deseret,  and 
in  the  spring  of  1862  he  crossed  the 
plains  as  a  teamster,  going  from  Utah 
to  the  Missouri  River  to  meet  the 
L.  D.  S.  emigrants.  He  drove  four 
yoke  of  oxen  from  Deseret  and  re- 
turned with  every  one  of  them  in 
good  condition.  John  R.  Murdock  was 
the  captain  of  his  company.  On  this 
trip  he  met  the  two  Carlson  sisters, 
who  later  were  to  play  an  important 
part  in  his  life.  On  the  trip  he  trav- 
eled 2,500  miles  by  ox  team.  On  May 
1,  1863,  he  married  Miss  Hannah  Carl- 
son, and  on  Oct.  10,  1863,  she  was 
sealed  to  him  in  the  Salt  Lake  Endow- 
ment House.  She  was  born  Jan.  29, 
1839,  and  died  in  childbirth  Jan.  22, 
1864,  and  was  buried  with  her  child 
at  Fillmore,  Utah.  On  March  27,  1864. 
Bro.  Pierce  married  his  wife's  wid- 
owed sister,  Elna  Carlson.  He  adopted 
and  had  sealed  to  him  her  two-year- 
old  son,  John  Murdock.  Elna  was 
born  March  26,  1842.  On  Jan.  6,  1865, 
Bro.  Pierce's  mother  died  at  Deseret 
and  was  buried  beside  his  wife,  Han- 
nah, at  Fillmore,  Utah.  By  his  second 
marriage  there  are  nine  children, 
namely,  John  Murdock  (adopted), 
Phebe  Elna,  Isaac  Washington,  Miel 
Carlson,  Hannah  Anna,  Ann  Eliza,  Cora 
Agusta,  Mary  Lucy  and  Eva  Ruth. 
All  of  the  above  are  now  living  except 
Cora  Agusta  and  Eva  Ruth.  In  the 
spring  of  1869,  he  became  one  of  the 
first  settlers  of  Levan,  Juab  Co.,  Utah, 
where  he  acted  as  presiding  ward 
teacher,  home  missionary,  Sunday 
school  teacher,  and  a  member  of  the 
School  of  Prophets  from  1869  to  1871. 
In  the  spring  of  1871  he  moved  to 
Glenwood,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  where  he 


46 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


taught  day  school  and  Sunday  school 
for  two  OX"  three  years.  He  was  also 
ward  clerk  and  tithing-  clerk,  and 
Sunday  school  superintendent  for  15 
years.  After  being  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  24,  1874,  by  Apostle  John 
Taylor,  he  acted  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  at  the  organization  of 
the  Sevier  Stake  of  Zion.  On  July 
15,  1874,  he  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  A.  T.  Oldroyd, 
Glenwood  Ward,  serving  until  the 
year  1886.  During  his  residence  in 
Glenwood,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  he  served 
as  a  school  teacher,  postmaster,  prose- 
cuting attorney,  justice  of  the  peace, 
etc.  He  was  very  active  in  Church  work 
also,  and  spent  much  time  and  money 
in  gathering  genealogy  and  in  Temple 
work  for  the  dead.  During  the  years 
1880-1884  he  arranged  for  the  baptism 
by  proxy,  in  the  Temples,  for  22,000 
dead,  and  for  500  endowments  for  the 
dead.  On  April  17,  1881,  he  married 
Miss  Caroline  Done,  as  his  plural  wife, 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Endowment  House, 
Pres.  Daniel  H.  Wells  performing  the 
marriage  ceremony.  She  was  boi-n 
July  21,  1865.  Thirteen  children  were 
born  of  this  union,  as  follows:  Arwell 
Lee,  Eudora  Elna  and  Lenora  Caroline 
(twins).  Ruby  Evadna,  Ada  Diantha, 
James  Lamar  and  Isaac  Larue 
(twins).  Vera  Juanita,  Clyde  Done, 
Ireta  and  Zereta  (twins),  George 
Teasdale  and  Nathan  Taylor  (twins). 
There  were  four  pairs  of  twins.  At 
the  present  time  seven  of  these  thir- 
teen children  are  living.  All  the  twins 
died  in  infancy,  except  Zereta  and 
Nathan  Taylor.  In  the  spring  of 
1886  Elder  Pierce  went  on  a  mission 
for  the  Church,  returning  home  July 
4,  1888.  His  missionary  work  was 
done  entirely  without  "purse  or  scrip." 
Whenever  he  needed  food,  shelter,  or 
clothing,  it  was  his  testimony  that  his 
needs  were  always  granted  him 
through  fervent  prayer.  He  was  very 
sociable,  genial,  full  of  faith,  a  good 
conversationalist,  a  good  speaker,  and 
made  many  friends  in  the  mission 
field.      He    labored    in    the    States    of 


Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  New  York,  West 
Virginia,  Connecticut,  Rhode  Island, 
and  also  in  Canada.  He  presided  a 
part  of  the  time  over  the  Pennsylvania 
Conference.  He  traveled  14,588  miles 
as  follows:  By  rail,  10,792  miles;  V)y 
steamboat,  269  miles,  and  on  foot, 
.'j,527  miles.  He  held  308  meetings, 
baptized  32  persons,  ordained  a  num- 
ber to  the  Priesthood  and  blessed  66 
children.  He  assisted  in  organizing 
branches  of  the  Church  in  Coal  Val- 
ley, Allegheny  Co.,  Elkhorn  and  Little 
Redstone,  Fayette  Co.,  Penn.  He  also 
organized  branches  of  the  Church  at 
East  Liverpool,  Ohio,  and  Mount 
Pleasant,  Penn.  His  senior  family 
had  moved  to  Rabbit  Valley,  and  were 
living  at  Loa,  Piute  Co.,  while  his 
junior  family  were  living  at  Glen- 
wood, Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  where  he 
found  them  well  upon  his  return  from 
his  mission.  During  his  residence  in 
the  Loa  Ward  he  served  as  1st  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Willis  E.  Robison. 
On  May  16,  1890,  he  was  arrested  by 
U.  S.  Deputy  marshals  for  violating 
the  law  by  living  with  his  two  \vi\es 
in  plural  marriage.  Having  been  ar- 
rested twice  by  two  different  marshals, 
whose  charges  of  law  violation  were 
in  conflict,  he  decided  to  take  his 
plural  family  and  find  a  new  haven 
of  rest  and  a  home  in  Old  Mexico.  On 
his  way  to  Mexico  he  stopped  along 
the  way  to  work,  that  he  might  pro- 
vide the  necessities  of  life  for  his 
family.  His  longest  t;tay  was  at 
Mancos,  Colorado,  where  he  rented 
a  saw  mill,  lumber  yard  and  store. 
He  was  advised  to  continue  his  jour- 
ney to  Mexico,  which  he  did,  arriving 
at  Colonia  Diaz,  Chihuahua,  Mexico, 
Dec.  1,  1890,  where  a  year  later  his 
senior  family  joined  him  and  both 
families  made  their  homes  for  a  num- 
ber of  years.  In  the  Mexican  Mission, 
later  known  as  the  Juarez  Stake  of 
Zion,  he  served  on  the  High  Council, 
on  the  stake  school  board,  and  as  a 
member  of  the  stake  Sunday  school 
superintendency.  Being  very  active 
in  the  ward  he  was  chosen  as  a  coun- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


47 


selor  to  Bishop  W.  Derby  Johnson, 
but  as  his  work  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  conflicted,  he  was  re- 
leased from  the  Bishopric.  He  was 
a  very  active  member  of  the  ward 
dramatic  club,  taking  the  leading 
parts  in  many  plays.  Pioneer  life  in 
the  Mexican  Latter-day  Saint  colonies 
was  difficult,  and  Elder  Pierce  with 
his  families  suffered  many  hardships 
and  privations.  He  did  some  farming, 
made  and  laid  up  large  Mexican  adobes, 
cobbled  and  repaired  shoes,  was  dance 
floor  manager  and  caller,  worked  on 
the  old  John  W.  Young  railroad 
between  Deming  and  Colonia  Diaz  as 
cook  for  the  surveyor's  camp,  etc.  In 
18it7  he,  with  others,  took  a  railroad 
grading  contract  of  12 '  !•  miles  be- 
tween Corralitos  and  Colonia  Dublan. 
Finishing  that  work  he  moved  to 
Ciudad  Juarez  with  a  part  of  his 
family  and  entered  the  retail  lumber 
business  in  the  early  part  of  1898. 
This  new  business  was  established, 
not  only  to  furnish  an  income  for 
Elder  Pierce,  but  to  provide  a  market 
for  the  lumber  which  the  L.  D.  S. 
colonists  were  manufacturing  in  the 
Sierra  Madre  Mountains  of  Chihuahua, 
Mexico.  The  first  Church  gatherings 
to  be  held  in  the  cities  of  Juarez, 
Mexico,  and  El  Paso,  Texas,  were  held 
at  the  home  of  Elder  Pierce.  Ciudad 
Juai-ez,  Mexico,  and  El  Paso,  Texas, 
were,  and  still  are  the  gateway  cities 
into  and  out  of  Mexico.  Most  of  the 
leading  brethren  and  sisters  of  the 
Church  usually  stopped  over  at  the 
Pierce  home,  where  they  were  always 
welcome,  and  were  given  the  needed 
help  in  crossing  the  international 
border.  Elder  Pierce  loved  the  leaders 
of  the  Church,  and  was  always  loyal 
and  keen  to  heed  their  advice.  It 
was  his  privilege  to  know  personally 
all  the  presidents  of  the  Church  dur- 
ing his  time.  As  a  child  he  often  sat 
on  the  knee  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith,  and  has  entertained  in  his 
home  all  the  succeeding  presidents  of 
the  Church,  as  well  as  many  of  the 
Apostles  and  other  prominent  Church 


leaders.  He  was  a  strict  tithe-payer, 
a  faithful  observer  of  the  Word  of 
Wisdom,  a  loyal  and  able  Church 
worker,  very  much  loved  and  honored 
by  those  who  knew  him  best.  On 
March  11,  1906,  his  faithful  and  loyal 
service  to  the  Church  and  to  his  fel- 
lows was  rewarded  by  his  being  called 
and  ordained  a  Patriarch  under  the 
hands  of  Apostle  George  Teasdale. 
He  had  great  joy  and  satisfaction  in 
this  new  calling,  and  gave  blessings 
to  many  of  his  immediate  family. 
After  an  eventful  and  successful  life, 
filled  with  pioneer  and  frontier  expe- 
riences, service  to  the  Church  and  his 
country,  he  passed  away  in  Ciudad 
Juarez,  Chihuahua,  Mexico,  from  an 
attack  of  pneumonia,  in  the  presence 
of  members  of  his  family,  Aug.  21, 
1906,  just  one  day  before  his  67th 
birthday  anniversary.  He  was  a  loyal, 
devoted  and  loving  husband  and 
•  father,  a  good  provider,  and  a  splendid 
business  man.  He  was  dearly  beloved 
by  his  large  family,  because  of  his 
just  dealings  with  them,  and  his  un- 
selfish devotion  to  their  welfare.  His 
remains  were  taken  to  Colonia  Dublan, 
Chihuahua,  Mexico,  where  a  large 
Church  funeral  was  held,  and  he  was 
laid  away  to  rest  in  the  Dublan  Ward 
cemetery.  His  wife,  Caroline  Done, 
died  at  El  Paso,  Texas,  Dec.  7,  1916, 
and  was  buried  in  the  Concordia 
Cemetery,  El  Paso.  His  wife,  Elna 
Carlson,  died  Sept.  9,  1919,  at  Shelley, 
Idaho,  where  she  is  buried.  Of  his 
fourteen  living  children  (seven  from 
each  wife),  six  live  in  El  Paso,  Texas, 
two  in  Arizona,  two  in  New  Mexico, 
two  in  Idaho,  one  in  Utah,  and  one  in 
Montana.  His  wives  and  children 
claim  that  he  was  very  just  and  suc- 
cessful in  living  the  law  of  plural 
marriage.  Notwithstanding  the  dif- 
ference in  the  ages  of  his  wives,  they 
claim  they  had  never  quarreled  with 
each  other.  They  were  loyal  and  de- 
voted to  him  and  to  their  children, 
and  as  a  result  the  children  of  both 
wives  are  very  near  and  dear  to  each 
other,  and  proud  of  their  relationship 
and  paternal  parent. 


48 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


PIERCE,  Arwell  Lee,  first  Bishop 
of  the  El  Paso  Ward,  Saint  Joseph 
Stake,  a  prominent  business  man  and 
agriculturist  of  El  Paso,  Texas,  and 
Ciudad  Juarez,  Chihuahua,  Mexico, 
was  born  June  8,  1882,  at  Glenwood, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Isaac 
Washington  Pierce  and  Caroline  Done. 
His  infancy  and  early  childhood  were 
spent  in  Utah.  At  the  age  of  eight 
years  he  left  Utah  with  his  parents  en 
route  to  old  Mexico,  where  they  went 
as  colonists  in  search  of  a  new  home. 
During  this  trip,  which  was  made  by 
team  and  wagon,  he  was  baptized  by 


his  father  in  a  Southern  Utah  stream 
on  July  21,  1890,  which  was  his  moth- 
er's birthday  anniversary.  His  father 
confirmed  him  a  member  of  the 
Church  the  same  day.  Accompanying 
the  family  on  this  trip  were  his  first 
cousin,  Brigham  H.  Pierce  and  his 
family.  One  day  while  crossing  the 
desert  near  Gallup,  New  Mexico,  Ar- 
well was  riding  on  the  side  of  his 
cousin's  heavily  loaded  wagon,  drawn 
by  four  fine  animals,  when,  as  he 
attempted  to  jump  free  from  the 
wagon,  his  foot  caught  in  the  brake 
and  he  was  thrown  underneath  the 
rear  wheel  which  ran  over  his  body 
almost  crushing  him  to  death.  No 
doctors    or    medicine    were    available, 


and  although  his  life  was  despaired 
of  for  more  than  a  week,  he  was 
healed  by  the  power  of  the  Priesthood 
through  the  administrations  of  his 
father  and  cousin.  After  about  five 
months  on  the  road  between  Utah  and 
old  Mexico,  a  part  of  the  time  stop- 
ping by  the  way  and  working  for 
funds,  the  family  arrived  at  Colonia 
Diaz,  Chihuahua,  Mexico,  on  Dec.  1, 
1890.  Here  Arwell  attended  day 
school,  and  was  an  active  member  of 
the  various  Chui'ch  auxiliary  organi- 
zations. On  June  8,  1894,  he  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  by  his  father  and 
served  as  first  counselor  in  the  Dea- 
cons quorum  presidency.  The  family 
made  their  home  in  Colonia  Diaz  for 
ten  years,  during  which  time  they  suf- 
fered many  hardships:  poor  housing 
conditions,  poor  food,  and  but  little 
clothing.  Arwell  worked  on  the  farm 
with  his  father.  In  1896,  during  the 
construction  of  the  Rio  Grande  Sierra 
Madre  &  Pacific  Railroad,  he  drove  a 
team  and  scraper,  aiding  in  building 
the  railroad  grade  near  Dublan,  when 
he  was  but  14  years  of  age.  In  the 
early  part  of  the  year  1898,  his  father 
established  a  retail  lumber  yard  in 
Ciudad  Juarez,  Chihuahua,  Mexico, 
and  Arwell  went  there  to  work  with 
him.  It  was  at  this  time  he  attended 
a  Mexican  day  school  and  studied 
Spanish,  which  he  learned  to  speak 
almost  without  any  foreign  accent. 
He  also  learned  to  read  and  write 
Spanish  very  well.  Returning  again 
to  his  mother's  home  in  Colonia  Diaz, 
he  did  odd  jobs;  farming,  hauling 
wood,  cutting  hay,  breaking  horses  to 
work,  and  riding  the  range,  to  help 
earn  something  to  support  the  family. 
In  the  month  of  May,  1900,  he  moved 
his  mother  and  the  family  to  Colonia 
Dublan,  where  a  home  was  built  and 
maintained.  During  the  years  1901-3, 
he  attended  the  Juarez  Stake  Academy 
under  the  presidency  of  Professor  Guy 
C.  Wilson,  who  encouraged  him  to 
take  up  school  teaching  as  a  profes- 
sion. Arwell  was  forced  to  give  up 
school,  however,  to   assist  his  father 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


49 


in  the  lumber  business  in  making  a 
living  for  the  family.  He  worked  as 
yardman  and  bookkeeper  and  managed 
the  business  during  his  father's  illness 
of  a  year  or  more.  In  1903  he  worked 
as  timekeeper  and  bookkeeper  at  a 
grading  camp  during  the  construction 
of  the  Nacosari  Railroad  in  Sonora, 
Mexico.  In  1902,  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  by  his  father.  He  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Mexico  in  1904.  He 
went  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  did 
his  temple  work  and  was  there  set 
apart  for  his  mission  by  Pres.  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  who  was  a  boyhood  friend 
of  his  father's.  Elder  Pierce  arrived 
in  Mexico  City  Christmas  Day,  1904. 
He  labored  under  the  presidencies  of 
Talma  E.  Pomeroy  and  Hyrum  S.  Har- 
ris. He  had  charge  of  the  Sunday 
schools  of  the  mission,  the  choir,  and 
was  conference  president  and  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Harris.  His  mis- 
sion was  filled  with  many  striking 
manifestations  of  the  power  of  God 
ill  his  ministrations  among  the  people. 
He  was  protected  and  delivered  from 
the  attacks  of  mobs  and  wicked,  de- 
signing men  in  a  miraculous  manner 
many  times.  He  baptized  eight  per- 
sons, blessed  several  children  and  or- 
dained a  number  to  the  Priesthood. 
While  in  the  mission  field,  he  under- 
went a  very  serious  operation,  from 
which  he  entirely  and  speedily  recov- 
ered. He  learned  to  converse  fluently 
and  preach  convincingly  in  the  Span- 
ish language  and  was  respected  and 
beloved  by  the  missionaries  and  by 
the  native  people  among  whom  he 
labored.  He  was  honorably  released 
to  return  home  because  of  the  death 
of  his  father  which  occurred  on  Aug 
21,  1906.  After  his  return  home,  he 
settled  his  father's  estate  in  the  Mex- 
ican courts,  and  after  managing  the 
business  for  the  estate  one  year,  he 
interested  some  El  Paso  business  men, 
organized  the  Juarez  Lumber  Com- 
pany and  took  over  the  lumber  yard 
from  the  estate.  He  bought  an  in- 
terest in  the  business  and  became  its 
active  head  as  manager.     He   organ- 


ized the  first  L.  D.  S.  Sunday  school 
in  Ciudad  Juarez,  which  was  a  part 
of  the  Dublan  Ward,  the  sessions 
being  held  at  the  home  of  his  mother 
with  whom  he  lived.  On  Oct.  2,  1907, 
he  married  Miss  Mary  Brentnell  Done 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  Pres.  John 
R.  Winder  officiating.  In  the  organ- 
ization of  the  Ciudad  Juarez  Branch 
of  the  Dublan  Ward,  he  was  assistant 
to  Presiding  Elder  James  Mortensen, 
and  the  meetings  were  held  at  Elder 
Pierce's  home.  On  March  15,  1910, 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Apostle 
George  F.  Richards.  In  September, 
1911,  he  and  his  wife,  accompanied 
by  his  sister.  Vera,  and  her  sister, 
Ethel,  made  a  month's  tour  of  Mexico, 
visiting  many  of  the  cities  and  towns 
where  he  had  served  as  a  traveling 
missionary  in  1905-6.  During  this 
trip  they  visited  many  places  of  his- 
torical interest,  including  the  National 
Museum  and  the  ruined  city  of  San 
Juan  Teotihuacan.  In  July,  1912, 
when  he  took  his  family  to  Dublan 
for  a  visit  and  vacation,  he  arrived 
just  as  the  Mexican  .revolutionists 
were  looting  the  stores,  taking  the 
colonists'  guns,  horses,  and  supplies. 
He  was  appointed  by  the  Juarez  Stake 
Presidency  as  one  of  a  committee  of 
three  to  accompany  the  first  train  of 
refugees  to  El  Paso,  Texas.  While  the 
colonists  were  refugees  in  El  Paso, 
he,  as  one  of  the  committeemen, 
helped  look  after  their  needs.  He, 
with  his  family,  had  many  exciting 
and  dangerous  experiences  during  the 
Mexican  Revolution,  including  getting 
caught  in  the  cross-fire  of  the  rebels 
and  federals  in  the  early  part  of  the 
thi-ee  days'  battle  of  Juarez,  when  the 
Madero  rebel  forces  took  the  town 
from  the  Diaz  Federal  forces,  bringing 
about  the  complete  overthrow  of  the 
old  Federal  Government  in  Mexico. 
He  with  his  wife  and  sister,  Ada,  es- 
caped in  a  one-seated  buggy  to  El 
Paso  through  the  Federal  lines.  In 
1912  he  moved  with  his  family  to 
El  Paso,  Texas,  where  he  has  since 
made    his    home.      Under   instructions 


Vol.   IV.  No.  4 


October,  1932 


50 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


from    the   presiding   brethren,   he    or- 
ganized   the    first    Latter-day    Saint 
Sunday  school  in  El  Paso,  Texas,  and 
was   its  first   superintendent.     In  the 
organization  of  the  first  independent 
branch  of  the  Church  in  El  Paso,  he 
was  first  counselor  to  Presiding  Elder 
Philip    H.    Hurst    from    1912   to    1916. 
In  1915  he  and  his  wife  attended  the 
World's  Fair  in  San  Francisco  and  the 
Fair  in  San  Diego.    The  trip  was  made 
by  way  of  Salt  Lake  City,  where  they 
attended  the  convention  of  the  Bene- 
ficial    Life     Insurance     Company     of 
which    he    was    the    state    agent    for 
Texas.    This  trip  was  awarded  to  him 
as   a   prize   for   writing  the   most   in- 
surance during  a  contest.     In  the  re- 
organization    of     the     Juarez     Stake 
presidency  in  1916,  he  was  ordained  a 
High   Priest  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Jos.  C.  Bentley  by 
Apostle  Anthony  W.  Ivins.     In   191S, 
when  Philip  H.  Hurst  moved  to  Utah, 
Elder  Pierce  succeeded  him  as  presi- 
dent  of   the   El    Paso   Branch   of   the 
Church.     He  served  in  the  stake  pres- 
idency and  as  branch  president  until 
Oct.   11,  1918,  when  he  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  newly  organized  El  Paso  Ward  by 
Pres.  Anthon  H.  Lund  in  the  office  of 
the    First    Presidency    in    Salt    Lake 
City,  Utah.     During  the  World   War 
he    assisted    the     Utah-Idaho     Sugar 
Company  to  bring  in  over  4000  Mex- 
ican laborers  to  work  in  the  beet  fields 
and  sugar  factories.     He  made  several 
trips  to  Utah  and  Idaho  to  take  train 
loads  of  these  laborers  and  afterwards 
visiting  them   to   keep   them   satisfied 
and  contented  in  their  work.     In  the 
year  1919  the  El  Paso  Ward  was  trans- 
feri-ed  from  the  Juarez  Stake  to  the 
St.    Joseph    Stake    and    Elder    Pierce 
continued  as  Bishop  of  the  ward.     In 
the  year  1920,  while  attending  general 
conference  in   Salt  Lake  City,  he   se- 
cured permission  from  the  First  Pres- 
idency of  the  Church  to  buy  ground  on 
which  to  erect  a  ward  chapel  and  rec- 
reation hall,  and  to  gather  funds  for 
the  erection  of  such  a  building  in  El 


Paso,  Texas.  In  the  year  1920  he 
entered  the  automobile  business  in 
Ciudad  Juarez  and  Chihuahua  City, 
and  in  1928  in  Arizona  and  El  Paso, 
Texas,  still  retaining  his  financial  in- 
terests in  the  lumber  business,  but 
devoting  most  of  his  time  to  the  auto- 
mobile business.  In  the  year  1928-9 
he  disposed  of  all  his  automobile  hold- 
ings in  Mexico,  Arizona,  and  El  Paso, 
Texas,  and  again  devoted  his  time  to 
the  lumber  business  and  farms.  Dur- 
ing the  summer  of  1925,  Bishop  Pierce 
and  his  family  in  company  with  others 
took  a  three  months'  vacation  trip 
up  through  Utah,  Idaho,  the  Yellow- 
stone National  Park,  and  on  up  to 
Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  Canada, 
coming  down  the  Pacific  Coast  to  San 
Diego,  California,  and  on  home.  This 
trip  was  very  educational  and  enjoy- 
able. In  October,  1927,  he  with  his 
entire  family  attended  the  dedication 
of  the  Arizona  Temple  at  Mesa.  Be- 
tween the  years  1920  and  1930  he 
visited  and  inspected  many  chapels 
and  recreation  halls  in  Utah,  Arizona 
and  California  in  search  of  ideas  for 
the  El  Paso  Ward  building.  In  April, 
1930,  he  with  his  wife  attended  the 
Centennial  Celebration  and  Conference 
of  the  Church  in  Salt  Lake  City  and 
got  the  authorization  of  the  First 
Presidency  of  the  Church  to  com- 
mence actual  construction  of  the  new 
ward  chapel  and  recreation  hall.  As 
Bishop  of  the  ward  and  chairman  of 
the  building  committee,  he  purchased 
all  the  building  materials,  furniture 
and  fixtures,  and  had  general  super- 
vision of  the  construction  and  financ- 
ing of  the  building  from  the  time  it 
was  begun  in  October,  1930,  to  the 
time  of  its  dedication  by  Pi-es.  Heber 
J.  Grant  on  May  24,  1931.  The  dedi- 
catory services  were  attended  by  many 
prominent  governmental  officials,  in- 
cluding the  mayor  of  El  Paso  and 
the  president  of  the  El  Paso  Chamber 
of  Commerce,  the  former  making  a 
very  splendid  address.  The  building, 
complete  with  furnishings  and  ground 
beautifications  cost  a  little  more  than 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


51 


870,000,  and  was  completely  paid  for 
at  the  time  of  dedication.  At  the 
time  of  the  dedication  of  the  grounds 
on  Oct.  27,  1930,  the  ward  had  but 
$8000  on  hand.  Those  who  worked  on 
the  building,  non-members  as  well  as 
members,  donated  approximately  one- 
third  of  their  daily  salaries  to  the 
ward.  The  non-member  friends  of  the 
Latter-day  Saints  contributed  liberally 
in  materials  and  cash  and  the  city 
officials  were  all  interested  and  did 
much  to  encourage  and  help  in  this 
work.  The  financing  and  building  of 
this  ward  chapel  is  an  outstanding 
event  in  the  life  of  Bishop  Pierce,  tak- 
ing as  it  did  ten  years  for  the  formu- 
lation of  plans  and  gathering  funds 
for  its  erection  and  being  built  at  a 
time  of  an  economic  depression.  In 
his  remarks  at  the  dedication  of  the 
chapel,  among  other  things,  Pres. 
Grant  said:  "I  think  it  is  a  little  less 
than  remarkable  that  you  have  in  this 
city  what,  in  my  judgment,  is  the 
finest,  most  costly,  and  splendid  ward 
meeting  house  of  any  ward  of  the 
same  size  in  the  whole  Church.  You 
have  done  yourselves  proud."  Fol- 
lowing closely  in  the  footsteps  of  his 
father  in  his  business  and  Church  life, 
on  the  international  border,  Bishop 
Pierce  has  made  his  home,  both  while 
living  in  Juarez  and  in  El  Paso,  a 
haven  of  rest  and  headquarters  for 
the  leading  brethren  and  sisters  of 
the  Church.  He  has  made  numerous 
automobile  and  train  trips  with  the 
General  authorities  of  the  Church  and 
other  leading  brethren  to  attend  con- 
ferences in  Mexico,  assisting  in  get- 
ting them  across  the  national  bound- 
ary. In  1926  he  made  an  automobile 
trip  with  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant  and 
his  party  of  eight  to  visit  the  Juarez 
Stake  in  Mexico  and  the  St.  Joseph 
Stake  in  Arizona.  Eight  children 
have  been  born  to  Bishop  Pierce  and 
wife  as  follows:  Arwell  Lee,  Joseph 
Brentnell,  Merlin  Done,  Ireta  May, 
Arthur  Clyde,  Wendell  Lothair,  Ar- 
wella  Caroline  and  Mary  Elizabeth. 
The    first    two    were    born    in    Ciudad 


Juarez,  where  they  died  in  infancy  and 
were  buried.  The  other  six  were  all 
born  in  El  Paso,  Texas,  where  they 
are  now  living  with  their  parents. 
Bishop  Pierce  earns  his  living  by  man- 
aging the  Juarez  Lumber  Yard,  S. 
A.,  in  Juarez,  Mexico,  and  operating 
approximately  300  acres  of  farming 
land  in  the  Juarez  Valley  in  growing 
alfalfa,  wheat,  corn  and  grapes.  He 
was  the  first  to  see  a  future  in  grow- 
ing fine  table  grapes  in  the  Juarez 
Valley  and  at  present  has  about  30,- 
000  grape-vine  plants  and  ships  his 
table  grapes  to  Mexico  City.  He  is 
still  Bishop  of  the  El  Paso  Ward,  St. 
Joseph  Stake,  which  has  a  member- 
ship of  485  souls.  The  ward  is  fully 
organized  and  splendid  work  is  being 
done  by  the  people  in  their  new  ward 
chapel  and  recreation  hall,  with  fine 
class  rooms,  Relief  Society  hall,  boy 
scout  quarters,  baptismal  font,  etc., 
in  the  basement.  The  chances  for 
growth  in  the  ward  membership  in 
the  next  few  years  are  good. 

PIERCE,  Mary  Brentnell  Done,  wife 
of  Arwell  Lee  Pierce,  and  Ward  Relief 
Society  president,  was  born  Feb.  18, 
1885,  at  Payson,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  Abraham  Done  and  Eliz- 
abeth Annie  Robinson.  She  was  bap- 
tized, March  3,  1893,  by  David  Fawn 
and  confirmed  by  her  father.  She  was 
present  at  the  dedication  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  and  was  very  greatly 
impressed  with  the  grandeur  of  the 
occasion.  At  the  age  of  three  years 
she  had  scarlet  fever  which  left  her 
hearing  impaired,  and  gave  her  much 
trouble  with  her  ears,  so  in  1899,  at 
the  age  of  14,  she  went  to  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  where  she  was  blessed 
for  her  hearing  and  was  completely 
healed.  With  her  parents  she  moved 
to  Colonia  Dublan,  Chihuahua,  Mex- 
ico, where  they  arrived  in  December, 
1899.  She  attended  the  Juarez  Stake 
Academy  under  the  presidency  of  Pro- 
fessor Guy  C.  Wilson,  graduating  from 
the  four  years  of  high  school  in  1904. 
She    taught    in    the    grade    schools    at 


52 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Dublan  for  the  next  three  years,  giv- 
ing all  of  her  money  to  her  parents 
for  the  support  of  the  family.  On 
Oct.  2,  1907,  she  was  married  to  Ar- 
well  Lee  Pierce  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  She  has  borne  eight  children, 
namely,  Arwell  Lee,  jun.,  and  Joseph 
Brentnell,  both  of  whom  died  in  in- 
fancy; Merlin  Done  and  Ireta  May, 
who  both  graduated  from  the  Juarez 
Stake  Academy,  and  have  since  been 


attending  the  B.  Y.  U.  at  Provo,  Utah, 
and  the  College  of  Mines  in  El  Paso, 
Texas;  Arthur  Clyde  and  Wendell 
Lothair  who  are  attending  High 
School  in  El  Paso,  Texas;  Arwella 
Caroline  and  Mary  Elizabeth,  who  are 
attending  the  grade  schools  in  El 
Paso,  Texas.  She  is  a  very  devoted, 
loyal  wife,  and  a  splendid  mother. 
Although  her  life  is  wrapped  up  in 
her  home,  with  her  husband  and  chil- 
dren, still  she  finds  time  to  devote  to 
her  Church  and  its  needy.  She  was 
second  counselor  to  Ella  Wilson  Hurst 
in  the  first  Relief  Society  presidency 
of  the  El  Paso  Branch,  and  when 
Sister  Hurst  moved  to  Utah  in  1918 
Sister  Pierce  succeeded  her  as  the 
president  of  the  El  Paso  Branch  Re- 
lief Society.  When  El  Paso  Ward 
was  organized  Oct.  11,  1918,  she  con- 
tinued   to    serve    as    president    of   the 


Ward  Relief  Society,  which  position 
she  still  holds.  Sister  Pierce  has  been 
a  very  close  companion  of  her  husband 
in  all  of  his  Church  social  and  business 
activities,  accompanying  him  on  many 
trips  to  Salt  Lake  City  to  attend  the 
general  conferences  of  the  Church, 
going  with  him  to  the  World's  Fair 
at  San  Francisco  in  1915,  to  Mexico 
City  in  1911,  and  on  a  three  months' 
tour  with  the  family  in  1925.  She 
has  been  a  real  support  to  her  husband 
in  his  positions  in  the  Church,  gladly 
entertaining  the  general  authorities  of 
the  Church  and  other  leading  brethren 
and  sisters  who  visit  them  from  time 
to  time  as  they  cross  the  border  into 
Mexico  and  return.  She  is  very  much 
beloved  by  all  who  know  her  best,  for 
her  genial  and  lovable  character,  her 
willingness  to  serve  in  carrying  cheer 
and  comfort  to  those  who  are  sick  and 
in  need.  She  has  ever  been  unselfish 
with  her  husband's  mother  and  chil- 
dren, all  of  whom  have  at  various 
times  made  their  home  with  them. 
For  a  number  of  years  before  the 
death  of  her  husband's  mother,  she 
and  the  younger  children  made  their 
home  with  Bishop  and  Sister  Pierce. 
As  the  care  and  burden  of  her  hus- 
band's widowed  mother  and  children 
has  been  his  responsibility,  she  has 
made  them  welcome  in  the  home,  and 
gladly  shared  her  husband's  income 
with  them.  As  Bishop  Pierce  is  the 
oldest  of  his  mother's  children.  Sister 
Pierce  has  stood  nobly  by  her  husband 
in  giving  his  brothers  and  sisters  the 
advantages  of  good  schooling  and  sent 
two  of  them  on  missions.  Even  to 
this  day,  when  all  her  husband's 
brothers  and  sisters,  except  one,  are 
married  and  have  families  of  their 
own,  they  happily  gather  at  the  home 
of  Bishop  and  Sister  Pierce  each 
Thanksgiving  Day,  and  have  for  years, 
to  enjoy  themselves  in  a  big  family 
dinner  together. 

PO.MEROY,     Talma      Emerson,     a 

Patriarch,    and    an    ordinance   worker 
in  the  Arizona  Temple,  at  Mesa,  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


53 


a  prominent  Elder  in  the  Mesa  Ward, 
Maricopa  Stake,  Maricopa  Co.,  Ariz., 
was  born  May  6,  1863,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Francis  Martin 
Pomeroy  and  Sarah  Matilda  Colburn. 
His  father  was  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  with  Brigham  Young  coming 


to  Utah  in  1847,  and  his  mother,  with 
her  parents,  arrived  in  the  Valley 
Sept.  24,  1848.  When  but  one  year 
of  age  his  parents  moved  to  Paris, 
Bear  Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  where  they  re- 
sided until  Sept.  14,  1877,  when  the 
family  migrated  to  Arizona,  locating 
at  Mesa.  He  drove  his  mother's  team 
most  of  the  entire  distance,  and  other- 
wise did  his  full  share  in  that  memor- 
able journey.  .  Bro.  Pomeroy  was  bap- 
tized in  1871  by  Thomas  Sleight  in 
Paris.  In  the  building  of  the  Mesa 
Canal,  though  only  15  years  of  age, 
he  received  credit  for  a  man's  full 
wage,  "because  he  earned  it"  by  doing 
a  man's  part.  Through  all  the  hard- 
ships usually  endured  in  settling  a 
new  country,  building  canals,  roads, 
homes,  clearing,  fencing  and  farming 
the  land,  and  in  freighting,  working 
in  the  harvest  fields,  etc.,  he  also  did 
a  man's  full  part,  aiding  materially  in 
supplying  the  necessaries  of  life  for 
the  family. 


Brother  Pomeroy  was  the  first  sec- 
retary of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 
Maricopa  Stake,  being  set  apart  Jan. 
20,  1883,  which  position  he  held  until 
April,  1884,  when  he  was  called  and 
left  for  a  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States,  being  set  apart  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  April  7,  1884,  and  ordained  to 
the  office  of  a  Seventy  by  William 
W.  Taylor.  He  labored  in  the  states 
of  Iowa  and  Minnesota,  under  the 
presidency  of  William  H.  Palmer,  be- 
ing very  successful  in  his  mission. 
He  had  several  extraordinary  expe- 
riences, one  of  which  occurred  in  the 
city  of  St.  Paul,  where  he  and  his 
companion  were  arrested  and  incar- 
cerated for  one  night.  The  next  morn- 
ing they  were  turned  loose,  and  in- 
formed that  there  was  no  charge 
against  them.  Later  the  city  com- 
mission informed  them  that  it  had 
been  made  a  misdemeanor  for  "Mor- 
mon" missionaries  to  preach  in  their 
city.  In  the  discussion  that  followed, 
Elder  Pomeroy  bore  a  strong  testi- 
mony of  the  truth  of  the  message  they 
were  bearing,  thus  preaching  the  gos- 
pel to  the  very  men  who  were  re- 
sponsible for  the  anti-Mormon  regu- 
lation. He  returned  home  in  October, 
1885,  after  having  been  honorably  re- 
leased. 

For  several  years  following  his  re- 
turn from  this  mission,  he,  in  con- 
nection with  his  brother,  William, 
operated  a  mail  and  stage  line  from 
Phoenix  to  Fort  McDowell,  via  Tempe 
and  Mesa.  In  1886  (Oct  13),  he  mar- 
ried Sarah  Melissa  Johnson,  the 
daughter  of  Benjamin  F.  Johnson  and 
Sarah  Melissa  Holman,  in  the  St. 
George  Temple,  Utah,  to  which  place 
he  was  accompanied  by  his  mother; 
they  made  the  journey  by  team  over- 
land for  that  purpose. 

In  October,  1885,  Brother  Pomeroy 
was  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Mesa  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  for  thx-ee  years. 
He  was  set  apart  as  one  of  the  seven 
presidents  of  the  90th  Quorum  of 
Seventy   when    that   quorum   was    or- 


i4 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ganized  March  28,  1886,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young,  which  position  he  held  until 
1913,  the  last  years  acting  as  senior 
president.  March  9,  1913,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  Hy- 
rum  M.  Smith.  In  June,  1903,  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Mexico,  in  fill- 
ing which  he  acted  a  part  of  the  time 
as  president  of  the  Mexican  Mission, 
after  being  set  apart  to  that  position 
by  Apostle  Abraham  O.  Woodruff, 
May  23,  1904.  Returning  to  the  City 
of  Mexico  in  company  with  Pres.  An- 
thony W.  Ivins  and  family,  and  Apos- 
tle Abram  Owen  Woodruff  and  wife, 
from  a  conference  meeting,  the  latter 
was  taken  ill,  which  developed  into  a 
serious  case  of  small-pox.  She  was 
taken  care  of  at  the  mission  house  by 
her  husband  and  Elders  Pomeroy,  Paul 
F.  Henning  and  Alonzo  I.  Taylor. 
Sister  Woodruff  succumbed  to  the 
disease,  and  shortly  afterwards,  at 
El  Paso,  Texas,  her  husband  died  with 
the  same  malady. 

In  1904  Elder  Pomeroy  was  joined 
by  his  wife  and  family,  who  had  been 
called  to  take  charge  of  the  mission 
house  in  the  City  of  Mexico.  Here 
Sister  Pomeroy  was  a  mother,  indeed, 
to  the  missionaries,  nursing  them 
through  illness  and  otherwise  admin- 
istering to  their  comforts.  Great 
progress  was  made  in  missionary 
work  during  Pres.  Pomeroy's  admin- 
istration. New  fields  were  opened  up 
and  new  branches  organized.  Being 
honorably  released,  he  returned  home 
Aug.  5,  1905.  Elder  Pomeroy  was 
stake  and  ward  chorister  for  ten 
years,  and  was  also  prominent  in 
dramatic  work  in  the  Maricopa  Stake. 
He  also  took  a  deep  interest  in  mili- 
tary affairs,  and  for  14  years  was 
identified  with  the  national  guard  of 
the  State  of  Arizona.  He  was  cap- 
tain of  Company  E  (the  first  company 
to  be  organized  in  Mesa),  later  cap- 
tain of  Company  D,  and  for  two  years 
and  a  half  served  as  major  of  the 
Second  Battalion,  to  which  position  he 
was  elected  by  ballot,  without  solici- 
tation, by  all  of  the  line  officers.     In 


1916  he  was  elected  chief  recruiting- 
officer  of  Arizona  and  major  com- 
manding the  reserve  battalion.  He 
held  the  responsible  position  of 
agency  director  for  several  years  with 
the  New  York  Life  Insurance  Com- 
pany, having  charge  of  as  many  as 
seven  states  at  a  time  in  Mexico  for 
them.  This  position  he  resigned  to 
take  the  same  with  the  Beneficial  Life, 
which  position  he  has  held  for  eight 
years,  and  is  still  a  loyal  worker  in 
their  cause.  He  was  the  first  ward 
representative  and  later  a  member  of 
the  stake  board  of  the  Genealogical 
Society  of  the  Maricopa  Stake,  a  home 
missionary,  and  in  charge  of  the  home 
mission  work  in  the  stake. 

Brother  Pomeroy  is  the  father  of 
seven  children,  five  of  whom  are  still 
living;  they  are  active  workers  in  the 
Church.  Their  names  are  Mabel 
Aeolia,  Clarence  Melnotte,  Gladys 
Leona,  Sarah  Melissa  and  Joseph 
Franklin.  His  two  sons  have  both 
filled  honorable  missions. 

While  the  Arizona  Temple  was  in 
course  of  construction,  and  visitors 
were  being  allowed  to  go  through  that 
building,  Elder  Pomeroy  acted  as  one 
of  the  guides  for  those  visitors,  and 
after  the  Temple  was  completed,  and 
before  its  dedication,  he  also  acted  as 
one  of  the  guides  to  visitors  who  were 
allowed  to  go  through  during  the  year 
it  was  kept  open  for  visitors.  After 
its  dedication  Elder  Pomeroy  was 
called  and  set  apart  as  a  regular 
Temple  ordinance  worker,  together 
with  his  wife.  They  have  both  acted 
in  that  capacity  ever  since,  this  being 
their  fourth  year.  Brother  Pomeroy 
visited  Salt  Lake  City  and  California 
in  19:51. 

POTTER,  Robert  John.  Mrd  Bishop 
of  the  Beaver  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Aug. 
15,  1895,  in  Raughton,  Cumberland 
Co.,  England,  the  son  of  Thomas  Pot- 
ter and  Margaret  Carlile.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1913,  crossing  the 
Atlantic    Ocean    in    the   ship    "Maure- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


55 


taiiia"  and  located  in  Logan,  Utah,  for 
a  t^hort  time,  and  thence  moved  to 
Collinston,  Utah  (Beaver  Ward).  He 
was  baptized  and  confirmed  Nov.  26, 
1916,  by  Hyrum  Kidman  at  Collin- 
ston; ordained  an  Elder  Aug.  11,  1918, 
by  Bishop  Race  A.  Johnson,  at  Beaver; 
married  Lottie  Lorenzo  Rucker  Aug. 
14,  1918,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple, 
which  union  has  been  blessed  with 
six  children,  namely,  Robert  Carleton, 
Margaret,     William     Bethel,     Leona, 


Naomi  and  Elizabeth.  Brother  Potter 
acted  as  second  assistant  superintend- 
ent of  the  Collinston  Sunday  school, 
and  on  March  4,  1923,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Arthur  R.  Capener 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 
Bishop  Johnson  of  the  Beaver  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  Nov.  10, 
1929,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  Richard  R.  Lyman  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  said  ward, 
which  position  he  now  occupies.  Bish- 
op Potter  filled  a  short-term  mission 
in  the  Western  States  Mission  in  1925- 
1926;  he  is  a  farmer  by  occupation. 


wood  Reid  and  Elizabeth  Ann  Mackey. 
While  still  an  infant  he  and  his  par- 
ents located  at  Lund,  Nevada,  where 
he  has  since  resided. 

He  was  baptized  March  29,  1908,  by 
Robert  Reid.  Being  born  of  goodly 
parents,  and  from  his  early  youth 
being  instructed  in  the  principles  of 
true  Christianity,  he  was  ordained  suc- 
cessively to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher,  and  Priest.  He  attended  the 
Dixie  Normal  School  during  the 
winter  of  1916-1917.  On  returning 
home  he  was  set  apart  as  second 
assistant  superintendent  in  the  Lund 
Sunday  school,  serving  in  that  ca- 
pacity from  1917  to  1919. 

After  being  ordained  an  Elder  Nov. 
25,  1919,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Canada  in  1919- 
1921,  laboring  mostly  in  the  Nova 
Scotia  Conference;  he  was  one  of  the 
first  L.  D.  S.  missionaries  to  labor  in 
Nova  Scotia  after  an  elapse  of  over 
twenty  years. 

On  Sept.  21,  1922,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Stake  President 
John  V.  Bluth  and  set  apart  to  act 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  George 
William  Fawcett,  of  the  Lund  Ward. 

On  May  19,  1926,  Brother  Reid  mar- 
ried Ada  Hammond  in  the  Manti 
Temple,  which  union  has  been  blessed 
with  three  children,  namely,  Alice, 
Henry  Alex  and  Ann. 

When  the  Nevada  Stake  of  Zion  was 
organized  Sept.  19,  1926,  Brother  Reid 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Lund 
Ward,  succeeding  Bishop  George  Wil- 
liam Fawcett,  which  position  he  still 
holds. 

Bishop  Reid  is  a  farmer  by  avo- 
cation, and,  judging  from  the  able 
manner  he  has  commenced  his  career 
as  a  presiding  officer  in  the  Church, 
a  bright  future  seems  to  be  before 
him. 


REID,  Hugh  Alexander,  5th  Bishop  RICHARDS,  Franklin  Snyder,  pres- 

of    the    Lund    Ward,    Nevada    Stake,  ident  of  the  High  Priests  Quorum  in 

White    Pine    Co.,    Nevada,    was    born  the  Ensign  Stake  of  Zion  and  general 

March    16,    1900,    at    Manti,    Sanpete  attorney    for    the    Church,    was    born 

Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Alexander  Kirk-  June  20,  1849,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 


56 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


the  son  of  Franklin  D.  Richards  and 
Jane  Snyder.  He  was  early  placed  in 
the  best  schools  the  city  afforded, 
and  as  he  advanced  in  years  he  re- 
ceived such  special  instructions  as 
were  within  reach.  Immediately 
after  reaching^  his  17th  year,  he  re- 
ceived a  certificate  from  the  Board 
of  Examiners  authorizing  him  to  teach 
school,  and  soon  thereafter  he  became 


the  teacher  of  one  of  the  largest  and 
best  schools  in  Salt  Lake  City,  which 
he  taught  during  the  years  1866,  1867 
and  1868.  While  his  father  presided 
over  the  European  Mission,  young 
Franklin  attended  to  his  father's  secu- 
lar affairs  at  home,  and  devoted  his  in- 
come to  the  maintenance  of  his 
father's  family.  At  the  same 
time  he  continued  his  own  higher 
studies  under  private  tutors.  On  Dec. 
18,  1868,  he  married  Emily  S.  Tanner 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  Their  children  are 
Franklin  Dewey  Richards,  Joseph 
Tanner  Richards,  William  S.  Richards 
and  two  adopted  daughters.  Wealthy 
Lucile  Jensen  and  Emily  R.  Beeson. 

In  May,  1869,  he  moved  with  his 
father's  family  to  Ogden,  in  Weber 
County,  where  he  was  soon  afterwards 
appointed  clerk  of  the  probate  and 
county  courts  and  later  was  elected 
county  recorder.     At  that  time  there 


was  no  lawyer  resident  in  Ogden,  and, 
as  the  public  lands  were  just  coming- 
into  market,  young  Franklin  applied 
himself  diligently  to  master  legal 
forms  and  qualify  himself  to  perform 
the  duties  of  the  offices  which  he  held. 
He  received  valuable  suggestions  from 
Attorney  Aurelius  Miner,  who  spent 
part  of  his  time  in  Ogden.  He  soon 
acquired  fame  for  keeping  the  public 
records,  and  when  they  were  examined 
by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  he  remarked 
that  they  had  no  equal  in  the  Ter- 
ritory. On  the  conclusion  of  his 
eighth  year  of  service  as  county  re- 
corder and  his  ninth  year  of  service 
as  county  clerk,  he  voluntarily  retired 
from  these  offices.  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  counseled  him  to  become  a 
lawyer,  and  when  Providence  brought 
him  in  close  communion  with  the  law, 
he  felt,  what  others  were  quick  to  ob- 
serve, that  he  had  come  to  his  destined 
calling,  and  after  studying  law  dili- 
gently he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of 
the  Third  District  Court  at  Salt  Lake 
City,  June  16,  1874.  While  pursuing 
his  law  studies  young  Richards  had 
developed  habits  of  concentrati(>n  and 
continuous  study.  He  became  a  suc- 
cessful and  eloquent  reasoner.  and 
thus  fitted  himself  to  be  an  able  de- 
fender of  constitutional  rights  and 
the  inherent  liberty  of  man.  His  first 
defense  was  that  of  a  man  charged 
with  murder,  and  he  fought  for  his 
client  with  a  skill  and  vigor  which 
astonished  even  his  familiar  friends; 
his  client  was  acquitted.  In  1877  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  dur- 
ing which  he  also  visited  many  coun- 
tries in  Continental  Europe.  In  the 
spring  of  1878  he  rendered  efficient 
service  in  the  litigation  commenced 
over  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  estate. 
Later  he  formed  a  partnership  with 
Judge  Rufus  K.  Williams,  formerly 
chief  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court  of 
the  State  of  Kentucky,  the  firm  name 
being  Richards  and  Williams.  When 
a  great  suit,  involving  over  a  million 
dollars,  was  brought  against  the 
Church  by  some  of  the  heirs  of  Pres. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


57 


Young  the  firm  of  Richards  &  Wil- 
liams was  retained  as  counsel  for  the 
Church,  and  successfully  defended  the 
case.  When  an  attempt  was  made  in 
1880  to  deprive  the  women  of  Utah 
of  their  franchise,  the  firm  of  Richards 
&  Williams  again  appeared,  with  other 
counsel,  in  the  defense  of  women's 
rights,  and  the  case  was  dismissed 
with  the  rights  of  the  women  pre- 
served. In  the  spring  of  1881  Brother 
Richards  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of 
the  Supreme  Court  of  California.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  constiutional 
convention  of  1882  and  was  sent  to 
Washington  as  one  of  the  delegates  to 
present  the  constitution  to  Congress, 
and  seek  admission  into  the  Union. 

In  company  with  Honorable  John 
T.  Caine  and  Delegate  David  H.  Peery 
he  went  to  Washington  and  labored 
faithfully  to  advocate  the.  claim  of 
Utah  to  statehood.  While  in  the  cap- 
itol  he  became  closely  associated  with 
the  eminent  jurist,  Jere  S.  Black,  and 
made  a  most  favorable  impression 
upon  many  of  the  prominent  states- 
men of  his  country. 

A  convention  of  the  Peoples  Party 
was  held  in  the  autumn  of  1882  to 
nominate  a  successor  to  George  Q. 
Cannon  as  delegate  in  Congress. 
Franklin,  who  had  come  to  the  front 
as  a  political  leader,  was  mentioned  by 
many  prominent  and  observant  per- 
sons as  the  man  fit  for  the  position. 
He,  however,  declined  the  honor  and 
suggested  John  T.  Caine,  a  gentleman 
of  long  legislative  experience,  who  was 
finally  elected.  After  that  Brother 
Richards  became  a  familiar  character 
at  the  nation's  capitol.  He  was  en- 
gaged again  and  again  to  plead  for 
the  rights  of  his  beloved  Utah  and 
her  people,  and,  during  the  anti- 
polygamy  prosecutions,  he  most  ably 
defended  many  of  his  brethren  against 
unmerited  punishment.  Among  other 
things  he  was  successful  in  his  effort 
to  have  the  so-called  segregation 
scheme  thwarted,  which,  if  it  had 
been  upheld,  might  have  meant  life 
imprisonment   for   unlawful   cohabita- 


tion, when  the  extreme  penalty  pre- 
scribed for  it  by  the  Edmunds  Law 
was  six  months  imprisonment  and 
$300.00  fine.  In  a  presentation  of  some 
of  these  cases  before  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States  Brother 
Richards  became  associated  with  such 
distinguished  lawyers  as  Wayne  Mac- 
Veagh,  Senator  George  G.  Vest, 
James  O.  Broadhead,  Jeremiah  M. 
Wilson,  George  Ticknor  Curtis  and 
others.  The  exposition  of  the  cause 
of  the  "Mormon"  people,  as  involved 
in  the  cases  against  Lorenzo  Snow, 
was  fearlessly  and  patriotically  made 
by  Brother  Richards  and  Mr.  Curtis, 
who  had  eminent  ability  as  an  ex- 
pounder of  the  Constitution.  The  ar- 
guments of  the  two  advocates,  the 
famous  Washington  jurist  and  the 
eloquent  Utah  lawyer — together,  con- 
stitute a  masterpiece  of  legal  logic. 
Brother  Richards,  in  order  to  defend 
the  righteousness  of  the  cause  of  the 
Saints,  constantly  appealed  to  the 
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States 
for  fair  and  just  constructions  of  the 
law  which  would  enable  the  people 
to  live  without  violating  it.  In  all  his 
legal  actions  the  personal  qualities  of 
Brother  Richards  w  ere  strongly 
marked.  He  exhibited  great  moral 
coui-age  and  dignity,  and  yet,  was 
affable  and  entertaining.  He  pos- 
sessed a  most  retentive  memory  and 
a  highly  cultured  mind. 

Franklin  S.  Richards  has  a  grand 
intellectual  inheritance,  having  de- 
scended from  a  long  line  of  staunch 
patriots  and  strong-willed  profes- 
sional men.  Possessed  of  high  aspi- 
rations and  hereditary  capacity  for 
growth  he  has  not  stopped  at  know- 
ing the  law  from  books,  but  he  has 
sought  to  learn  the  laws  written  upon 
the  hearts  of  humanity  as  well  as 
those  underlying  principles  of  justice 
which  are  the  only  sure  foundation 
for  the  endurance  of  a  free  republic. 
He  has  had  a  brilliant  career  and  the 
cause  of  the  Latter-day  Saints  has 
always  been  his  greatest  concern. 
Because   of  his   ability   and   integrity 


58 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Brother  Richards  has  been  retained 
as  the  legal  adviser  and  general  at- 
torney for  the  Church  ever  since  his 
employment  as  such  in  1880,  and 
though  nov^f  advanced  in  years  he  is 
still  bright  and  vigorous  physically 
and  mentally,  and  is  still  wide  awake 
in  protecting  the  rights  of  his  friends 
and  the  affairs  of  the  Church  to  which 
he  has  been  so  devoted  and  patriotic 
during  his  entire  life. 

In  addition  to  the  foregoing  Brother 
Richards  served  several  years  as  city 
attorney  for  Ogden  City  and  as  prose- 
cuting attorney  for  Weber  County. 
He  held  the  office  of  city  attorney  for 
Salt  Lake  City  from  1884  to  1890. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Legislative 
Council  of  Utah  in  1884,  and  was  pres- 
ident of  the  council  in  1890.  He  was 
chairman  of  the  Peoples  Party,  and 
conducted  the  memorable  campaign  of 
1890.  He  took  part  in  the  Reed  Smoot 
investigation  as  attorney  for  Pres. 
•Joseph  F.  Smith  and  other  witnesses. 

He  was  a  member  of  the  Consti- 
tutional Convention  of  1895  that 
framed  the  Constitution  for  the  State 
of  Utah,  and  took  an  active  part  in  its 
proceedings,  especially  in  favor  of 
Woman's  Suffrage.  Although  no  man 
worked  harder  or  did  more  to  secure 
statehood,  he  has  always  declined  of- 
ficial positions,  when  repeatedly  urged 
by  influential  citizens  to  accept  some 
of  the  highest  offices  within  the  gift 
of  the  people. 

Some  of  Brother  Richards'  most  im- 
portant and  valuable  service  for  the 
Church  has  been  rendered  in  estab- 
lishing the  system  of  corporations 
sole,  for  holding  titles  to  church  prop- 
erties throughout  the  world.  The 
Bishops  in  the  organized  wards  of  the 
Church  are  corporations  sole,  and  hold 
the  title  to  their  respective  ward 
properties.  The  presidents  of  stakes 
are  also  incorporated  to  hold  the  titles 
to  stake  properties.  The  Presiding 
Bishop  is  a  corporation  sole  to  hold 
the  titles  to  all  mission  properties 
where  the  laws  of  the  state  or  country 
in  which  the  land  is  situated  will  per- 


mit, and  the  President  of  the  Church 
is  incorporated  to  hold  the  titles  to  the 
general  funds  and  property  of  the 
Church,  including  temples,  educational 
institutions  and  other  real  estate.  One 
of  the  principal  reasons  for  creating 
these  corporations  sole  was  to  give 
them  perpetual  succession  so  that 
titles  would  not  be  affected  by  the 
death,  resignation  or  disqualification 
of  any  persons  holding  them. 

At  the  time  that  Brother  Richards 
recommended  this  system  to  the 
Church  (and  it  was  adopted  by  the 
presiding  authorities)  there  were  but 
few  corporations  sole  in  the  United 
States,  and  it  required  considerable 
work  on  his  part  to  get  the  legislature 
of  Utah,  Idaho,  Arizona,  Wyoming 
and  Nevada,  where  the  principal 
wards  and  stakes  of  the  Church  were 
situated,  to  pass  laws  providing  for 
such  corporations.  After  the  laws 
were  passed  he  personally  directed 
the  creation  of  the  corporations  and 
the  transfers  of  property  to  them, 
which  required  much  of  his  time  dur- 
ing several  years.  There  are  now 
(in  1931),  nearly  a  thousand  ward 
and  stake  corporations  in  the  Church. 
The  vesting  of  titles  to  mission  prop- 
erties in  the  Presiding  Bishop's  Cor- 
poration was  especially  difficult  and 
laborious  because  the  lands  are  lo- 
cated in  nearly  all  of  the  States  of 
the  Union,  as  well  as  in  Europe  and 
other  foreign  countries,  and  it  involved 
the  necessity  of  him  becoming  ac- 
quainted with  the  laws  of  the  dif- 
ferent states  and  countries  through- 
out the  world  in  which  the  Church 
properties  are  situated. 

In  1929  Elder  Richards  lost  his  be- 
loved companion,  Sister  Emily  S. 
Richards,  a  talented  woman  of  high 
intellectual  attainments,  who  took  a 
most  prominent  part  in  women's  suf- 
frage and  other  matters  affecting  the 
rights  and  interests  of  her  sex.  For 
many  years  she  was  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Relief  Society 
of  the  Church  and  a  director  in  many 
charitable  and  benevolent  institutions. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


59 


She  was  president  of  the  Board  of 
Lady  Managers  at  the  World's  Fair 
in  1893,  and  held  many  important  posi- 
tions in  connection  with  the  Red  Cross 
and  other  organizations  during  the 
World  War.  Her  charming  person- 
ality and  cheery  disposition  made  her 
a  favorite  and  leading  figure  among 
her  associates,  and  enabled  her  to  im- 
part encouragement  and  help  to  her 
husband  and  others,  which  gave  her 
great  joy  and  satisfaction. 

In  Church  capacity,  Brother  Rich- 
ards has  served  as  a  member  of  the 
High  Councils  of  the  W^eber  and  En- 
sign Stakes  of  Zion,  and  for  several 
years  he  has  acted  as  president  of  the 
High  Priests  Quorum  in  the  Ensign 
Stake. 

(For  further  details  see  Life  of 
Franklin  S.  Richards  in  TuUidge's 
History  of  Salt  Lake  City,  pp.  132-140, 
and  Whitney's  History  of  Utah,  Vol. 
4,  pp.  532-537.) 

RICHINS.  Parley  Thomas,  5th  Bish^ 
op  of  the  Henefer  Ward,  Summit  Co., 
Utah,  was  born  Aug.  19,  1877,  at 
Henefer,  Summit  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Charles  Richins  and  Esther  S. 
Ovard.  He  received  an  ordinary  com- 
mon school  education  in  his  native 
town  and  afterwards  studied  at  the 
Agricultural  College  at  Logan.  Being- 
born  of  Latter-day  Saint  parents,  he 
was  baptized  July  11,  1886,  by  John 
Paskett,  was  ordained  a  Deacon  Aug. 
26,  1894,  by  Edward  Richins,  an  Elder 
Feb.  19,  1901,  by  John  Paskett  and 
a  Seventy  Feb.  20,  1901,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young.  In  1901-1903  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southwestern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  the  State  of 
Arkansas.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  9,  1911,  by  Ezra  M.  Rob- 
ertson and  acted  as  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Micah  F.  Harris  and  later 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  O. 
Stephens  whom  he  succeeded  as  Bish- 
op in  July,  1925.  which  position  he 
still  holds.  From  his  earliest  boy- 
hood Bishop  Richins  has  been  a  dili- 
gent Church  worker  and  served  in  the 


superintendency  of  the  Henefer  Sun- 
day school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
also  served  as  a  justice  of  the  peace, 
a  member  of  the  Henefer  school  board 
and  a  clerk  of  the  North  Summit 
School  Board.  In  1904  (June  29th), 
he  married  Fanny  Judd  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  by  whom  he  is  the 
father  of  four  children,  namely,  Lyle 
Parley,  Maxine  Belle,  LaRue  Esther 
and  Ovena  Jane.  Bishop  Richins  is  a 
farmer  and  merchant  by  avocation 
and  at  present  serves  as  postmaster 
at  Henefer. 

RILEY,  James  Hyrum,  2nd  Bish- 
op of  the  Ogden  11th  Ward,  Weber 
Stake,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Oct. 
29,  1879,  at  Hooper,  Weber  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  Willard  Riley  and 
Emily  J.  Frew.  He  moved  with  his 
parents  to  Ogden  when  about  two 
years  old  and  was  baptized  Aug.  7, 
1890,  by  James  M.  Thomas.  From 
his  earliest  youth  he  took  an  active 
part  in  Church  affairs,  and  as  a  young- 
boy  acted  as  secretary  of  the  Ogden 
2nd  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  also 
as  secretary  of  the  ward  Sunday 
school.  Later  he  acted  as  president 
of  the  Ogden  2nd  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
and  still  later  as  an  officer  in  the 
Ogden  1st  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and 
Sunday  school.  He  received  a  good 
common  school  education,  and  has 
understood  how  to  turn  his  experience 
in  life  to  good  use.  His  father  died 
Nov.  11,  1894,  when  James  was  15 
years  old.  He  was  an  employee  of 
the  Union  Pacific  Railroad  Company 
from  April,  1897  to  July,  1904.  After 
that  he  served  as  a  messenger  for  the 
new  Pingree  National  Bank,  and  later 
as  bookkeeper,  teller,  assistant  cashier, 
and  cashier.  At  present  he  acts  as 
vice-president  of  the  Commercial 
Security  Bank.  He  was  associated 
with  the  Pingree  National  Bank  from 
1904  to  1920,  as  vice-president,  and 
with  the  National  Bank  of  Commerce 
in  1920-1930,  which  bank  was  merged 
with  the  Commercial  Security  Bank 
in    June,    1930.      In    1916    Bro.    Riley 


60 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


was  ek'Cted  a  member  of  the  Ogden 
City  Board  of  Education  and  later 
became  president  of  said  board.  At 
present  he  is  serving  his  4th  term  in 
the  latter  position.  In  February,  1905, 
Bishop  Riley  married  Hattie  E.  Hinch- 
cliff  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  which 
union  has  been  blessed  with  four  chil- 
dren (8  girls  and  1  boy),  viz.,  Kathryn, 
Emily  Winnifred,  James  Hinchcliff, 
and  Edna.  Brother  Riley  was  chosen 
as  Bishop  of  the  Ogden  11th  Ward 
May  28,  1922,  being  ordained  and  set 
apart  to  that  position  June  27,  1922, 
by  Apostle  Richard  R.  Lyman.  This 
position  he  still  occupies,  and  the 
Ogden  11th  Ward  has  grown  and  pros- 
pered under  his  able  administration. 

ROMNEY,  Orson  Douglas,  a  prom- 
inent Elder  and  Church  worker  in  the 
Ensign  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  Aug. 
15,  1860,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  George  Romney  and  Vilate  El- 
len Douglas.  Being  born  of  goodly 
parents  he  was  raised  as  a  Latter-day 
Saint  from   his  early  youth   and  was 


baptized  when  eight  years  of  age.  As 
be  became  old  enough  to  take  part  in 
Church  activities  he  was  ordained  suc- 
cessively to  the  oiTices  of  Deacon, 
Priest,  Elder,  Seventy  and  High 
Priest.  When  only  13  years  of  age  he 
went  to  St.  George,  southern  Utah,  to 


live  with  his  grandparents,  and   only 
received    such    education    as    southern 
Utah  could  afford  at  that  time.     Re- 
turning to  Salt  Lake  City  two   yeai-s 
later,   he   attended    school    in    the    old 
20th    Ward   school   house,   and   subse- 
quently became  a  student  at  the  Des- 
eret   University    (now   the   University 
of  Utah).     Among  his  fellow  students 
there  were  Gov.  Heber  M.  Wells  and 
Hon.    B.    H.    Roberts.      As    a    boy    he 
served  in  the  presidency  of  a  Deacons 
quorum   in  the  20th  Ward,  and   later 
as    secretary    of    an    Elders    quorum. 
Still  later  he  acted  as  one  of  the  pres- 
idents of  the  13th  Quorum  of  Seventy. 
He  also  served  in  the  presidency  of  the 
20th  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  a.s  su- 
perintendent   of    the     Wai'd     Sunday 
school    until    called    to    the    superin- 
tendency  of  the  Ensign  Stake  Sunday 
schools.    For  twenty  years  he  acted  as 
a  member  of  the  Ensign  Stake  High 
Council.     In  1888  to  1892  he  filled  a 
mission   to   New  Zealand  and   twenty 
years  later  filled  a  second  mission  to 
New  Zealand,  on  which  mission  he  was 
accompanied   by  his   family  and   pre- 
sided   over    the    mission.      Returning 
home  from  these  missions  he  circum- 
navigated   the    globe    twice,    the    last 
time   in   company  with   his   two   sons, 
Orson    D.,   jun.,   and   Melbourne,   who 
are   now   associated   with   him    in    the 
lumber  business.    In  a  secular  capacity 
Elder    Romney    commenced    his    life's 
career  as  a  butcher's  delivery  boy,  and 
later   as    delivery    boy    for    the    Z.    C. 
M.    I.      Still    later   he    worked    in    the 
wholesale  china  and  crockery  depart- 
ment   of    that    in.«titution.      He    also 
served  as  salesman  in  the  20th  Ward 
Co-op   store,  acted  as  clerk  at   S.   B. 
Teasdale's    store    on    Main    St.,    Salt 
Lake  City,  and  for  25  years  worked  in 
the    Taylor,    Romney   and   Armstrong 
Lumber    Company.      While    thus    em- 
ployed he  held  successively  every  posi- 
tion from  teamster  to  manager.  When 
his    father    was    72    years    of   age   he 
started  Orson  D.  in  the  lumber  busi- 
ness, which  since  then  has  grown  with 
rapidity   and    during   the    first    ten   or 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


61 


twelve  years  of  its  existence  it  grew 
to  greater  proportions  than  the  old 
firm  of  Taylor,  Romney  &  Armstrong. 
Elder  Orson  D.  Romney  is  now  the 
principal  owner  of  the  Romney  Lum- 
ber Co.  and  has  acted  as  president  of 
the  same  since  1920. 

In  1884  (Sept.  4th),  Bro.  Romney 
married  Emma  Frances  Phillips, 
daughter  of  Wm.  G.  Phillips  and 
Maria  Ann  Tuckfield;  this  union  has 
been  blessed  with  five  children,  three 
sons,  namely,  Orson  D.,  jun.,  Mel- 
bourne, and  William  G.  (deceased), 
and  two  daughters,  namely,  Vilate 
(wife  of  Antoine  R.  Ivins),  and  Ger- 
trude ( wife,  now  widow,  of  Shirley 
Clawson). 

SMITH,  Elias  Asahel,  senior  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  of  the  Liberty 
Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  March  21. 
18.57.  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 


of  Elias  Smith  and  Lucy  Brown.  Ho 
was  baptized  May  4,  1865,  by  Nathan 
Davis,  and,  taking  an  active  part  in 
Church  affairs  from  his  early  youth, 
he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  and  later 
promoted  to  other  positions  in  the 
lesser  Priesthood.  In  1882  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Edwin  W.  Davis 
and   in    1886   a   High    Priest  by    Pres. 


John  Taylor  and  called  to  serve  as  a 
special  member  of  the  High  Council 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  in  order  to 
assist  in  adjusting  differences  existing 
between  Utah  and  Salt  Lake  counties 
in  reference  to  the  water  of  Utah 
Lake  for  irrigation  purposes.  The  de- 
cision rendered  by  this  council  was 
accepted  by  all  parties  concerned.  Sub- 
sequently a  judgment  was  rendered  by 
the  district  court  sitting  at  Provo 
confirming  the  decision  of  the  High 
Council.  In  1888  Bro.  Smith  was  chos- 
en as  a  regular  member  of  the  High 
Council,  and  when  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
of  Zion  was  divided  in  1904,  he  was 
selected  as  a  regular  High  Councilor 
in  the  new  Liberty  Stake  in  which 
capacity  he  has  served  faithfully  ever 
since.  In  1882  (Dec.  19th)  he  married 
Laura  Nebeker,  daughter  of  John 
Nebeker  and  Lurena  Fitzgerald.  This 
union  was  blessed  with  two  children, 
namely,  Elias  A.,  jun.,  and  Inez.  His 
wife  died  Sept.  15,  1886,  and  on  June 
1,  1892,  he  married  Emily  Catherine 
Weiler,  daughter  of  Elijah  M.  Weiler 
and    Emily   Crismon. 

Besides  being  an  active  Church 
worker,  Elder  Smith  served  as  pro- 
bate judge  of  Salt  Lake  County  from 
1884  to  1889,  as  selectman  of  Salt 
Lake  County  two  years,  as  a  member 
of  the  Territorial  legislature  two 
terms,  acting  as  president  of  the  legis- 
lative council.  He  has  also  served  as 
a  member  of  the  Territorial  Board  of 
Equalization  and  as  chairman  of  said 
board  for  two  terms,  and  as  regent 
of  the  University  of  Utah  from  1886 
to  1888.  In  1897  he  was  appointed  by 
Gov.  Heber  M.  Wells  as  a  member 
of  the  commission  for  the  Pioneer  Ju- 
bilee; he  also  served  11  years  as  a 
member  of  the  Board  of  Corrections  of 
the  Utah  Penitentiary,  and  is  now  act- 
ing as  chairman  of  the  Utah  State 
Land  Board,  under  appointment  of 
Gov.  George  H.  Dern.  By  the  foregoing 
it  will  be  seen  that  Elias  A.  Smith 
has  led  a  most  active  life  and  rendered 
efficient  service  to  both  Church  and 
State. 


62 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


SMITH,  William  Richard,  2nd  pres- 
ident of  the  Woodruff  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  born  March  21,  1884,  at  Logan, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Isaac 
Smith    and    Harriet    Camilla    Ensign. 


He  was  raised  and  received  a  common 
school  education  in  Logan,  and  later 
attended  the  Utah  Agricultural  Col- 
lege at  Logan  in  1902-1906  and  1909- 
1910.  Still  later  he  graduated  from 
the  Ohio  State  University  at  Colum- 
bia, Ohio,  receiving  a  doctor's  degree 
in  veterinary  medicine  in  June,  1912. 
Pie  again  attended  the  Utah  Agri- 
cultural College  in  1922-1923  and  re- 
ceived a  B.  S.  degree  from  that  insti- 
tution. From  his  earliest  youth  Pres. 
Smith  took  a  lively  part  in  Church 
affairs  and  was  ordained  consecutively 
to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and 
Priest.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Sept.  12,  1906,  by  James  A.  Lieshman 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in 
1906-1909.  He  served  as  second 
counselor  in  the  Woodruff  Stake  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  in  1923-1924.  In  1910 
(July  28),  he  married  Zina  V.  Crouch 
in  the  Logan  Temple,  which  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  two  children, 
namely,  Vivian  and  Helen  Jean.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  John 
M.  Peart  Oct.  17,  1926,  after  which  he 
served  as  a   member  of  the  Woodruff 


Stake  High  Council  until  July  1,  1928, 
when  he  was  set  apart  by  Apostle 
Melvin  J.  Ballard  as  president  of  the 
Woodruff  Stake  of  Zion,  succeeding 
John  M.  Baxter.  Pres.  Smith  has  also 
been  active  in  secular  matters.  Thus 
he  worked  as  foreman  of  the  Experi- 
mental Farm  at  Logan  in  1904-1906 
and  followed  the  veterinarian  profes- 
sion from  1912-1915;  he  then  entered 
the  cattle  business  in  Idaho  in  con- 
nection with  grain  farming.  On  March 
21,  1923,  he  accepted  the  position  of 
county  agricultural  agent  in  Uinta 
County,  Wyo.,  and  located  at  Evan- 
ston.  This  is  his  occupation  at  the 
present  time. 

STIMPSON,  John,  4th  Bishop  of  the 
Riverdale  Ward,  Weber  Stake,  Weber 
Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  2,  1878,  in 
Riverdale,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  Stimpson  and  Ann  Mary 
Christensen.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
2,  1886,  by  Richard  Dye;  ordained  a 
Deacon  Feb.  1,  1891,  by  William 
Stimpson,  a  Teacher  Jan.  7,  1900,  by 
Wm.  Stimpson,  an  Elder  Sept.  3,  1905, 
by  A.  A.  Bingham,  a  Seventy  March 
21,  1920,  by  Job  Pingree,  and  a  High 
Priest  July  15,  1923,  by  Apostle 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.  Brother  Stimp- 
son was  raised  and  educated  at  River- 
dale, and  in  his  boyhood  days  acted 
as  librarian  of  the  Riverdale  Sunday 
school.  After  residing  a  short  time 
at  Lewiston,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  he  mar- 
ried Annie  E.  Gale  June  9,  1901,  which 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  eight 
children,  viz.,  John  Vernal,  Myrtle  G., 
William  Francis,  Lewis  Elwood,  Or- 
ville  D.,  Mary  Esther,  Bertha,  and 
Howard.  After  returning  to  River- 
dale from  Cache  Valley,  he  acted  as 
an  officer  in  the  Riverdale  Ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  also  as  assistant 
superintendent  of  the  ward  Sunday 
school.  From  1923  to  1930  he  acted 
as  a  counselor  to  Bishop  Murray  K. 
Jacobs,  and  is  now  acting  as  Bishop  of 
the  Riverdale  Ward,  succeeding  Bish- 
op Jacobs.  Bishop  Stimpson,  who  is 
a    farmer   by    occupation,    has    always 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


63 


taken  an  active  pait  in  Church  affairs, 
and,  judging  from  his  experience  in 
the  past,  he  will  make  a  successful 
presiding  officer. 

STODDARD,      George      Eckersley, 

second  president  of  the  Union  Stake 
of  Zion  in  Oregon,  was  born  July  12, 
1865,  at  Wellsville,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 


the  son  of  John  Stoddard  and  Emma 
Eckersley.  His  early  schooling  was 
sacrificed  in  order  to  contribute  to  the 
temporal  wants  of  a  large  Tamily  of 
brothers  and  sisters.  He  spent  long 
hours  as  a  boy  working  in  the  early 
primitive  saw  mills  located  in  isolated 
tracts  of  timber  in  Utah  and  Wyo- 
ming. In  this  school  he  learned  the 
difficult  lessons  of  hard  work  and 
perseverance.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  and  taking  an 
active  part  with  his  parents  in  Church 
activities,  he  was  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  in  his  early  youth.  He 
married  Ellen  S.  Izatt,  July  19,  1888, 
which  union  was  blessed  with  ten 
children,  namely,  G.  Earl,  Elmer  I, 
David  I,  A.  Lester,  John  I,  Jeanette, 
Howard  J,  Waldo  I,  and  Robert  L. 

Bro.  Stoddard  moved  to  Oreg'on  in 
1889,  locating  in  the  La  Grande  Ward, 
where  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and   Bishop  and  set   apart  to  preside 


over  the  La  Grande  Ward  in  March, 
1902.  He  held  this  position  until  De- 
cember, 1907,  and  although  young  in 
years  he  soon  won  the  love  and  con- 
fidence of  his  people. 

In  1912,  in  company  with  his  wife 
and  daughter  Jeanette,  Bro.  Stoddard 
made  a  trip  to  Europe  where  two  of 
his  sons  (Earl  and  Elmer)  were  labor- 
ing as  missionaries. 

In  September,  1914,  Bro.  Stoddard 
was  chosen  as  president  of  the  Union 
Stake,  succeeding  Franklin  S.  Bram- 
well  in  that  position.  Making  a  suc- 
cess of  his  presidency,  both  as  a 
Bishop  and  a  stake  president,  he  be- 
came very  popular  with  his  people 
and  the  Union  Stake  of  Zion  pros- 
pered under  his  administration.  Also 
in  a  secular  capacity  Pres.  Stoddard 
became  successful  and  ranked  as  one 
of  the  leading  business  men  in  eastern 
Oregon.  Thus  he  acted  as  manager 
of  the  sugar  factory  at  La  Grande 
from  1899  until  1907.  He  also  acted 
as  manager  of  the  Stoddard  Bros. 
Lumber  Co.,  which  did  an  immense 
amount  of  business  in  that  part  of  the 
country.  Previous  to  this  he  had  been 
associated  with  David  Eccles  and 
Charles  W.  Nibley  and  others  in 
building  a  sugar  factory  at  La  Grande 
and  together  with  Bro.  Nibley  he 
purchased  the  Grande  Ronde  Lumber 
Company  at  Perry,  which  was  the 
beginning  of  his  long  lumber  cai*eer. 
While  acting  as  Bishop  a  beautiful 
stake  tabernacle  was  built  at  La 
Grande  under  his  direction.  Pres. 
Stoddard  died  while  still  in  his  active 
manhood,  Feb.  27,  1917,  in  California, 
following  an  operation.  Charles  W. 
Nibley,  one  of  the  speakers  at  his 
funeral,  remarked:  "I  never  had  a 
friend  to  whom  I  was  more  closely 
attached.  We  shared  each  other's  con- 
fidences and  many  an  hour  have  we 
spent  discussing  not  only  business 
matters  but  religious  and  social  mat- 
ters, which  were  very  near  to  our 
hearts.  In  all  of  my  association  with 
George  I  never  found  a  single  thought 
or  idea,  nor  knew  of  a  single  action 


64 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


of  his  life  that  did  not  ring  true.  He 
was  always  candid  and  fair.  His 
judgment  I  regarded  as  most  sound. 
He  was  dependable  and  loyal  to  the 
core,  always  a  hard  worker,  indeed  I 
often  chided  him  for  working  too  hard 
and  advised  him  to  give  more  atten- 
tion to  his  rest  and  leisure.  I  loved 
him  with  all  my  heart  and  soul,  for 
he  was  one  of  the  most  lovable  men 
I  ever  knew.  It  would  hardly  be  fair 
for  me  to  close  without  calling  atten- 
tion to  the  fact  that  he  was  very 
much  blessed  in  securing  a  wife  who 
helped  him  in  so  many  ways.  He 
appi-eciated  this  himself  and  we  often 
.spoke  of  it.  The  family  of  children 
that  he  has  left  behind  testify  to  the 
kind  of  man  he  was." 

In  the  deinise  of  Pres.  Stoddard  the 
Church  lost  one  of  its  most  faithful 
and  devoted  presiding  officers  and  the 
community  at  large  one  of  its  most 
able  and  successful  business  men  and 
enterprising  citizens,  who  possessed 
the  love  and  unstinted  confidence  of 
all  his  associates  in  life. 

SUMMERHAYS,  Joseph  William,  a 

prominent  member  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union,  was  born  Jan. 
15,  1847,  at  Pimlico,  Middlesex,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Caleb  Summerhays 
and  Margaret  Moore.  His  parents 
joined  the  L.  D.  S.  Church  when  he 
was  one  year  and  11  months  old  and 
became  members  of  the  Westminster, 
Chelsea  and  Wandsworth  branches  of 
the  London  Conference  successively. 
In  1866,  he  emigrated  to  Utah,  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic  Ocean  in  the  sailing 
vessel  "Caroline"  which  sailed  from 
London  May  5,  1866,  with  389  Saints 
under  the  leadership  of  Samuel  H. 
Hill.  The  voyage  lasted  about  five 
weeks,  as  the  ship  did  not  arrive  at 
New  York  until  June  11th.  Thence 
the  company  continued  the  journey 
by  railroad  and  steamboat  to  Wyo- 
ming, a  village  situated  on  the  Mis- 
souri River,  seven  miles  north  of 
Nebi-aska  City.  The  emigrants  made 
this  trip  from  New  York  principally 


in  box  cars.  For  crossing  the  plains 
Bro.  Summerhays  hired  out  as  a  team- 
ster to  Capt.  Andrew  H.  Scott,  who 
then  acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Provo  2nd 
Ward,  and  drove  a  team  consisting  of 
three  yoke  of  steers  and  an  iron  axle 
wagon.  Capt.  Scott's  train  left  the 
Missouri    River   August    1,    1866,   and 


arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct.  8,  1866. 
Several  severe  snow  storms  were  en- 
countered on  the  latter  part  of  the 
journey,  in  one  of  which  a  number  of 
cattle  perished;  nearly  thirty  of  the 
emigrants  died  on  the  journey  across 
the  plains.  On  his  arrival  in  Provo, 
Bro.  Summerhays  delivered  his  team 
to  the  owner  and  spent  his  first  winter 
in  Utah  (1866-1867)  in  Provo.  Later 
he  resided  in  Pleasant  Grove,  but 
finally  made  his  permanent  home  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  In  1868-1869  he  as- 
sisted in  the  construction  of  the  Union 
Pacific  Railroad  through  Weber  Can- 
yon and  afterwards  became  an  em- 
ployee of  William  Jennings  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  Bro.  Summerhays  was 
ordained  an  Elder  on  June  27,  1870, 
and  on  the  same  day  he  married  Mary 
M.  Parker  in  the  Endowment  House. 
Subsequently  he  married  three  other 
wives,  namely,  Mary  C.  Bishop,  on 
June  19,  1882,  Sarah  Berrett,  on  June 
5,   1884,  and  Hilda  Johnson,  on  Nov. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


65 


16,  1888.  By  these  four  wives  he 
became  the  father  of  39  children.  For 
several  years  Bro.  Summerhays  was 
associated  with  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.  and 
Hiram  B.  Clawson  in  the  hide  and 
wool  business,  and  in  1883  went  into 
business  for  himself.  For  many  years 
he  was  dean  of  the  hide  and  wool 
business  in  Utah.  He  was  also  asso- 
ciated with  the  late  Bishop  Edward 
Hunter,  Robert  Morris  and  Wm.  H. 
Rowe  in  the  tannery  business.  Later 
he  was  one  of  the  promoters  of  the 
Granite  Paper  Mill  Company,  which 
for  a  number  of  years  produced  paper 
in  large  quantities  at  the  paper  mill 
situated  at  the  mouth  of  Big  Cotton- 
wood Canyon.  After  the  paper  mill 
was  burned,  he  was  one  of  the  or- 
ganizers of  the  Big  Cottonwood  Power 
Company.  For  many  years  he  was  a 
director  of  the  Deseret  News  Com- 
pany and  served  on  the  executive 
committee.  At  the  time  of  his  demise 
he  was  president  of  the  J.  W.  Sum- 
merhays and  Sons  Co.,  dealers  in 
hides,  wool,  furs,  etc.,  and  also  pres- 
ident of  the  Utah  Wool  Pulling  Com- 
pany located  in  Tooele  County.  Bro. 
Summerhays  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  11,  1876,  by  John  E.  Evans  and 
served  successively  in  the  council  of 
the  24th  and  105th  quorums  of  Sev- 
enty, until  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest.  For  many  years  he  labored 
as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  and  later  in  the  Granite 
Stake.  He  was  president  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  in  the  16th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  he  also  acted  as  teacher 
and  secretary  in  the  Sunday  school. 
When  the  new  meeting  house  was 
built  in  the  16th  Ward  (on  Fifth  West 
St.)  he  served  on  the  building  com- 
mittee. 'He  acted  as  a  special  mis- 
sionary and  had  charge  of  the  High 
Priests  of  the  Forest  Dale  Ward  and 
also  served  on  the  Temple  and  Gene- 
alogical committees  of  the  Granite 
Stake.  But  perhaps  his  greatest 
achievement  as  a  Church  worker  was 
in  connection  with  his  activities  as  a 
member  of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 


Union  Board,  and  also  as  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Religion 
Classes.  Besides  the  many  ecclesias- 
tical offices  he  held,  he  served  in 
various  secular  positions,  such  as 
school  trustee,  tax  collector  of  school 
funds,  chairman  of  the  first  town 
board  of  Forest  Dale,  etc.  His  death 
occurred  June  27,  1929,  at  the  L.  D. 
S.  Hospital  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Be- 
sides his  39  children,  his  descendants 
up  to  the  time  of  his  demise  numbered 
46  grandchildren  and  four  great 
grandchildren,  all  of  whom,  so  far, 
have  shown  loyalty  and  devotion  to 
the  Church,  in  which  their  illustrious 
ancestor  trained  them  in  the  fear  of 
the  Lord.  The  following  is  culled 
from  an  editorial  published  in  the 
"Deseret  News"  at  the  time  of  his 
death:  "In  the  death  of  Joseph  W. 
Summerhays  the  "News''  loses  a  long 
time  and  highly  esteemed  associate 
and  friend.  For  many  years  prior  to 
1882  he  was  associated  with  this  in- 
stitution in  a  directorial  capacity,  be- 
sides being  interested  in  the  manu- 
facture of  printing  paper,  an  industry 
that  the  "News"  was  then  promoting 
and  had  been  fostering  through  the 
years.  In  business  affairs  he  was 
energetic  and  capable,  independent 
withal  and  courageous  in  pursuing  the 
policy  which  appeared  to  deserve  the 
approval  of  his  integrity,  promptness 
and  square  dealing.  Those  who  came 
into  commercial  contact  with  him 
were  always  able  to  speak  of  him  in 
high  terms.  He  came  to  America 
when  a  lad  of  sixteen.  In  Utah  his 
activity  and  influence  have  been  felt 
for  good  in  many  directions  and  the 
circles  in  which  he  has  been  a  leading 
figure  will  surely  miss  him!" 

SARGENT,  George,  a  Utah  pioneer, 
was  born  Feb.  22,  1823,  at  Dowsdale, 
Lincolnshire,  England,  the  son  of  John 
Sargent  and  Ann  Anger.  In  1842  he 
married  Elizabeth  Rolett,  born  July 
5,  1823,  the  daughter  of  William  and 
Diana  Rolett.  Having  become  a  con- 
vert   to   the    restored   gospel,    George 


Vol.  IV,  No.  5 


January,  1935 


66 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Sargent  was  baptized  in  September, 
1857,  and,  being  ordained  an  Elder,  he 
labored  for  some  time  as  a  local  mis- 
sionary, during  which  time  his  home 
was  always  open  to  the  Elders  who 
traveled  in  the  vicinity.  In  1862  he 
emigrated  to  America,  with  his  wife, 
crossing  the  ocean  in  the  ship  "Man- 
chester," which  sailed  from  Liverpool 
May  6,  1862,  with  a  company  of  376 
emigrating  Saints  in  charge  of  Elder 
John  D.  T.  McAllister  and  arrived  in 


New  York  June  12,  1862.  Continuing 
the  journey  to  Florence,  Neb.,  Brother 
Sargent  and  wife  crossed  the  plains 
and  mountains  in  Wni.  H.  Dame's 
Chuixh  fi-eight  train,  which  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  28,  1862,  Brother 
Sargent  having  acted  as  a  teamster 
with  an  ox  team  en  route.  At  the  end 
of  each  day's  journey,  after  the  even- 
ing meal  was  over,  he  would  frequent- 
ly take  his  violin  and  play  some  lively 
jigs  and  reels,  and,  although  weary 
with  the  day's  march,  many  of  the 
travelers,  thrilled  by  the  merry  strains, 
would  dance  and  sing  and  fill  the  air 
with  their  laughter  before  retiring  to 
rest. 

Bi'other  Sargent  and  his  wife  resided 
for  a  time  in  East  Mill  Creek,  but 
by  advice  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young  he 


moved,  in  1863,  to  Unionville  (later 
called  Hoytsville),  Summit  Co.,  Utah. 
Having  learned  the  trade  of  carpenter 
and  cabinet-maker  in  England,  Broth- 
er Sargent  soon  erected  a  log  cabin  and 
later  built  a  saw  mill,  the  first  erected 
in  that  part  of  the  country.  Brother 
Sargent  established  a  carpenter  shop, 
where  he  made  furniture  and  other 
household  necessities  for  his  neigh- 
bors. He  also  surveyed  and  assisted 
in  constructing  the  first  irrigating  ca- 
nal at  Hoytsville,  and  acted  as  water 
master  there  for  a  number  of  years. 
On  June  20,  1868,  in  the  Endowment 
House,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  he  married 
Anna  Christina  Isakson,  born  Aug.  17, 
1833,  in  Sweden,  by  whom  he  had  five 
children,  namely,  Amanda  Elizabeth, 
born  March  13,  1869  (wife  of  Thomas 
Snyder)  who  died  Oct.  4,  1897;  George 
William  Victor,  born  May  8,  1870,  and 
died  Dec.  11,  1888,  unmai'ried;  Chris- 
topher Chambers,  born  March  20,  1872, 
died  June  1,  1906,  unmarried;  Jemima 
Vine,  born  July  2,  1874,  (wife  of 
Chauncey  Herbert  Crittenden),  and 
Anna  Edith,  born  Oct.  23,  1875  (wife 
of  James  Elias  Trowbridge).  His  wife 
Elizabeth  Rolett  died  May  8,  1873;  she 
had  no  children. 

In  the  spring  of  1872,  assisted  by  his 
wife  Anna,  Brother  Sargent  erected 
the  fii-st  bz'ick  house  built  in  Summit 
County.  There  being  no  wall  paper  or 
paint  available.  Sister  Sargent  white- 
washed the  interior  of  her  home  with  a 
paste  made  from  wood  ashes.  Assisted 
by  his  wife,  he  also  built  a  log  cabin 
for  his  brother  John  Sargent,  who, 
with  his  family,  arrived  from  England 
in  1868.  Brother  Sargent  bought  con- 
siderable land  which  he  farmed,  and 
during  the  grasshopper  plague,  by 
some  miracle,  his  wheat  was  unharm- 
ed. One  of  his  neighbors  asserted  that 
this  was  a  blessing  given  him  on  ac- 
count of  his  generosity,  and  after  the 
plague  he  loaned  seed  to  his  neigh- 
bors, taking  in  return  only  bushel  for 
bushel.  He  was  ever  generous  and 
kind,  and  on  hand  to  help  any  one  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


67 


need.  He  was  an  active,  faithful 
church  worker  throughout  his  entire 
life. 

Brother  Sargent  never  lost  his  love 
for  his  violin,  and  the  pleasant  eve- 
nings spent  by  his  family  singing  and 
dancing  to  his  music  are  still  remem- 
bered as  the  happiest  times  of  their 
lives.  He  died  Sept.  18, 1899,  at  Hoyts- 
ville,  respected  and  beloved  by  all  who 
knew  him. 

SARGENT,  Anna  Christina  Isakson, 

a  Utah  pioneer,  was  born  Aug.  17, 
1833,  at  Lurup,  Christianstad  Lan, 
Sweden,  the  daughter  of  Johan  Peter 
Isakson  and  Andrietta  Raasce.  She 
received  most  of  her  education  at  home 
from  her  mother,  who  was  a  school 
teacher.  She  was  also  taught  to  spin 
flax  and  wool  into  linen  thread  and 
yarn  and  to  weave  and  knit.  Later 
she  became  a  nurse  and  practiced  this 
profession  in  her  native  land  until  she 
came  to  America. 

She  was  the  first  of  her  family  to 
accept  the  gospel  and  was  baptized 
May  25,  1862,  by  Elder  Christian  Sand- 
berg.  On  account  of  opposition  on  the 
part  of  her  father,  who  was  very  bit- 
ter towards  the  Latter-day  Saints,  she 
was  compelled  to  leave  home,  and  on 
April  28,  1864,  emigrated  to  Zion, 
crossing  the  Atlantic  in  the  ship 
"Monarch  of  the  Sea,"  in  company 
with  973  emigrating  Saints  in  charge 
of  Patriarch  John  Smith.  Having  ar- 
rived safely  at  Wyoming,  Nebraska, 
she  crossed  the  mountains  and  plains 
in  Captain  Isaac  A.  Canfield's  com- 
pany which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Oct.  4,  1864.  During  the  journey  of 
nearly  a  thousand  miles  she  walked 
the  entire  distance,  wading  streams 
and  rivers  and  enduring  all  the  hard- 
ships incident  to  those  times;  and  be- 
ing unable  to  speak  English  she  was 
very  much  handicapped.  Upon  her  ar- 
rival in  Salt  Lake  City  she  met  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  who,  placing  his  hands 
upon  her  head,  promised  her  that  she 
should  be  a  mother  in  Israel,  that  her 


children  would  love,  honor  and  obey 
her,  that  she  should  be  prosperous  and 
ride  in  her  own  carriage,  and  that  her 
last  days  would  be  her  best.  All  of 
these  predictions  were  fulfilled.  After 
spending  a  short  time  in  Salt  Lake 
City  she  went  to  Hoytsville,  Summit 
Co.,  Utah,  where  she  acted  in  the  ca- 
pacity of  a  nurse  with  great  success. 
She  also  wove  carpets,  made  men's 
suits  and  women's  dresses  from  home- 
made cloth,  often  that  of  her  own  man- 
ufacture. 

In  1868  (June  20),  in  the  Endowment 
House  in  Salt  Lake  City,  she  was  mar- 
ried to  George  Sargent  by  Apostle  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff.  She  bore  her  husband 
five  children. 

Sister  Sargent  had  a  kind  and  gen- 
tle disposition  and  a  personality  which 
led  many  to  seek  her  advice  and  coun- 
sel. Especially  mothers  and  expectant 
mothers  sought  her  guidance,  and  she 
was  never  too  busy  to  listen  to  them 
and  give  words  of  comfort.  She  was 
a  great  lover  of  flowers  and  the  raising 
of  flowers  and  vegetables  was  her  hob- 
by and  to  offer  them  to  her  friends  was 
her  joy.  She  died  at  Hoytsville,  Sum- 
mit County,  Utah,  Nov.  6,  1904,  leav- 
ing one  son,  two  daughters  and  several 
grandchildren  to  mourn  her  loss. 

SCHOW,  Anchor  Carlos,  first  presi- 
dent of  the  Lehi  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  April  13,  1887,  at  Lehi,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Peter  Senius  Schow 
and  Harriet  Amanda  Losee.  He  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools  and  the 
high  school  of  Lehi;  was  baptized  Oct. 
14,  1895,  by  Lawrence  Hill  at  Lehi; 
ordained  a  Deacon  in  1901,  a  Teacher 
Dec.  10,  1902,  and  an  Elder  Dec. 
4,  1905,  by  his  father.  He  took  an  ac- 
tive part  in  Church  affairs  from  his 
earliest  youth;  thus  he  acted  as  sec- 
retary and  counselor  in  the  local 
Teachers'  quorum,  secretary  in  the 
Lehi  1st  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and 
counselor  and  later  president  of  the 
5th  quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Alpine 
Stake.     He    filled   a   mission   to    the 


68 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Southern  States  in  1906-1908,  labor- 
ing in  Virginia,  After  returning  home 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Edward 
Southwick,  and  served  as  secretary 
and  afterwards  as  president  in  the  68th 
quorum  of  Seventy.  He  also  acted  as 
an  assistant  in  the  ward  Sunday  school, 
president  of  the  ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
and  later  superintendent  of  the  Sun- 
day school  in  the  Lehi  1st  Ward.  On 
April  18,  1920,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Apostle  James  E.  Talmage 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  to 


Bishop  Whipple.  He  filled  a  short 
term  mission  to  California  in  1926- 
1927,  and  on  July  1,  1928,  he  was 
chosen  and  set  apart  as  president  of 
the  Lehi  Stake  of  Zion  by  Joseph 
Fielding  Smith,  jun.,  the  said  stake 
being  organized  on  that  day.  Brother 
Schow  has  also  been  active  in  local 
secular  affairs,  and  acted  as  secre- 
tary of  the  Lehi  Irrigation  Company 
for  five  years.  In  1909,  (May  13th) 
he  married  Laura  Elsie  Davis  of  Lehi 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  which  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  four  chil- 
dren, viz.:  Eldon  Carlos,  Iris  Mar- 
garet, Ha  Irene,  and  Erma  Davis. 

SMITH,    Julina    Lambson,   member 
of   the   General    Board   of   the   Relief 


Society  from  October  6,  1892,  to  April 
2,  1921,  was  born  June  18,  1849,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
Alfred  Boaz  and  Melissa  Jane  Big- 
ler  Lambson.  Her  parents  were  pio- 
neers of  1847,  and  on  the  journey 
across  the  plains  her  father,  who  was 
an  excellent  mechanic,  was  invaluable 
to  the  company  in  which  he  traveled. 
Many  nights  while  crossing  the  plains 


he  was  called  out  to  mend  broken 
wagons  and  make  repairs  which  re- 
quired all  of  his  attention  until  early 
morning,  so  that  the  journey  could  be 
continued  without  delay.  It  was  said 
of  him  by  members  of  the  company 
that  without  his  assistance  the  com- 
pany could  not  have  succeeded  in  cross- 
ing the  plains.  The  mother  of  Julina 
is  the  youngest  sister  of  Bathsheba  W. 
Smith,  who  for  years  presided  over  the 
Relief  Society  of  the  Church.  The 
Lambson  home  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
which  was  finished  in  1848,  was  the 
first  house  plastered  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
As  lime  could  not  be  had,  a  mixture  of 
clay  and  sand  mingled  with  hair  clip- 
ped from  the  backs  of  cows  and  oxen, 
was  used.  When  the  house  was  torn 
down  after  seventy-five  years  of  ser- 
vice, the  plaster  was  still  firm  on  the 
walls  and  ceilings.     The  nails  used  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


69 


the  home  were  all  made  by  Elder 
Lambson  on  his  own  anvil  from  wagon 
tires.  The  lumber  he  hauled  from  Red 
Butte  Canyon  east  of  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  also  forged  all  the  mill  irons  used 
in  the  first  mills  built  in  Utah,  except- 
ing one  built  by  Isaac  Chase  in  which 
the  i^ons  were  brought  across  the 
plains. 

Julina's  oldest  sister,  Melissa  Jane, 
later  Mrs.  Albert  W.  Davis,  was  born 
in  a  dugout  at  Winter  Quarters  shoi'tly 
before  her  parents  began  crossing  the 
plains.  Soon  after  the  birth  of  the  third 
daughter,  Edna,  who  was  born  March 
3, 1851,  Alfred  B.  Lambson  left  his  lit- 
tle family  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
West  Indies.  When  Johnston's  Army 
was  approaching  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
the  inhabitants  of  that  city  moved 
south,  the  Lambson  family  also  took 
up  their  journey  and  most  of  them  lo- 
cated temporarily  at  Nephi.  Those 
were  trying  days  and  in  her  early 
girlhood,  Julina  experienced  all  the  vi- 
cissitudes of  pioneer  life,  in  company 
with  other  early  residents  of  Utah. 
Many  were  the  days  when  wheat  flour 
could  not  be  obtained,  and  the  Lambson 
children  were  forced  to  eat  corn  bread 
dry  or  home-made  molasses  or  a 
little  grease.  From  her  childhood  until 
the  time  of  her  marriage  her  home  was 
made  most  of  the  time  with  her  uncle, 
President  George  A.  Smith,  who  was 
at  the  time  Historian  of  the  Church, 
and  in  whose  home  the  records  of  the 
Church  were  kept.  It  was  there  that 
she  met  Joseph  F.  Smith,  who  was  at 
the  time  employed  in  the  Historian's 
Office  as  a  clerk.  In  1866,  May  5th,  she 
was  married  to  Elder  Smith,  who  later 
was  chosen  as  one  of  the  Apostles  and 
destined  to  become  the  President  of 
the  Church.  This  union  was  blessed 
with  eleven  children,  namely,  Mercy 
Josephine,  Mary  Sophronia,  Donette, 
Joseph  Fielding,  David  Asael,  George 
Carlos,  Julina  Clarissa,  Elias  Wesley, 
Emily  Jane,  Rachel  and  Edith  Elenor. 
Her  husband  married  other  wives  and 
provided  for  them  separate  homes  as 


readily  as  his  means  would  permit.  The 
old  Smith  home,  333  West  1st  North 
Street,  Salt  Lake  City,  was  built  piece- 
meal, a  room  being  added  at  a  time. 
Yet  it  was  one  of  the  very  substantial 
two-story  buildings  in  the  city.  This 
was  the  home  of  Julina  Lambson  Smith 
and  her  family  until  Pres.  Smith 
moved  her  and  her  unmarried  children 
to  the  Bee-Hive  House  about  1903.  The 
wives,  although  provided  with  separate 
homes,  always  helped  each  other,  and 
learned  to  love  each  other  dearly.  In 
times  of  sickness  they  assisted  each 
other,  and  in  times  of  health  rejoiced 
together  and  worked  side  by  side  with 
their  husband.  For  a  number  of  years 
Sister  Smith  acted  as  a  midwife,  hav- 
ing graduated  and  having  been  com- 
missioned in  this  practice.  She  was 
instrumental,  not  only  in  bringing  the 
children  of  her  husband's  other  wives 
into  the  world,  but  in  bringing  hun- 
dreds of  other  children,  with  remark- 
able success.  Her  younger  sister, 
Edna,  who  was  also  a  wife  of  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  also  practiced  suc- 
cessfully in  this  calling.  How  different 
were  those  days!  Not  only  did  these 
sisters  attend  women  in  confinement, 
but  acted  as  nurses  a  good  part  of  the 
time  for  the  women  on  whom  they 
waited,  and  all  for  the  handsome  sum 
of  five,  or  at  most  ten  dollars. 

When  the  first  Retrenchment  So- 
ciety was  organized  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Sister  Smith  was  chosen  to  act  as 
president  of  that  organization,  June 
25,  1870,  in  the  16th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City.  Nearly  all  of  the  meetings  were 
held  in  her  home.  While  she  was  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  she  started  the  burial 
clothes  department  January  4, 1912,  by 
the  request  of  the  board  and  the  First 
Presidency.  She  was  one  of  the  or- 
dinance workers  in  the  Endowment 
House,  and  when  the  Salt  Lake  Temple 
was  built  she  was  among  those  origin- 
ally called  to  labor  in  that  building 
and  was  duly  set  apart.  This  position 
she  held  rendering  faithful  service  un- 


70 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


til  1925,  when  she  met  with  a  pain- 
ful accident,  breaking  her  hip,  which 
compelled  her  to  retire. 

During  the  anti-polygamy  raids,  her 
husband,  then  one  of  the  Apostles,  was 
asked  to  take  charge  of  the  records  of 
the  Church,  for  there  was  great  fear 
that  they  might  fall  into  the  hands  of 
the  enemies  of  the  people.  While  this 
commission  was  upon  him,  he  was  sent 
to  the  Hawaiian  Islands,  where  he  had 
performed  his  first  mission  in  his  early 
youth,  and  Sister  Julina  accompanied 
him  with  a  baby  only  one  year  old, 
leaving  five  of  her  children  at  home. 
During  their  sojourn  on  the  islands, 
which  lasted  two  long  years,  Elias 
Wesley  was  born.  He  presided  over 
the  Hawaiian  Mission,  his  native  land, 
from  1919  to  1922,  having  previously 
filled  a  mission  there.  Sister  Smith 
preceded  her  husband  back  to  Salt 
Lake  City  where  with  her  two  little 
children  she  again  took  up  her  labors 
with  her  united  family.  She  was  a 
charter  member  of  the  Daughters  of 
the  Utah  Pioneers,  and  served  as  a 
captain  of  Ten  for  some  time.  Be- 
sides being  the  mother  of  eleven  chil- 
dren, she  has  up  to  the  year  1934,  sev- 
enty-two grand-children  and  a  large 
number  of  great-grandchildren. 

The  scenes  of  Sister  Julina  Smith's 
life  have  changed  much  during  the 
past  fifty  years.  Many  homes  now 
shelter  those  who  once  lived  in  the  old 
Smith  home.  Even  now,  she  says,  she 
can  hear  the  prattle  of  happy  chil- 
dren as  they  engage  in  play  in  her 
large  living  room  and  in  the  spacious 
lot  upon  which  the  homes  were  built; 
the  memory  of  trials,  sickness  and 
tribulations,  as  well  as  many  joys,  are 
also  readily  recalled.  She  recalls  that 
when  night  came  on,  and  the  husband 
and  father  was  home,  he  went  from 
bed  to  bed  saying  good  night  and  tuck- 
ing in  each  child  for  a  peaceful  night's 
rest,  and  how  the  children  gathered  in 
for  family  prayers.  Many  and  happy 
are  the  memories  of  the  old  home,  still 


preserved  and  the  headquarters  for  the 
West  Side  Seminary  of  the  Church. 

SNOW,  Moroni,  Bishop  of  Provo 
Fifth  Ward,  Member  of  General  Board 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  etc.,  was  born  May 
13,  1858,  in  Provo,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow  and  his  wife 
Artimesia  Beman.  At  the  time  of 
his  birth  his  parents  had  been  exiled 
from  their  home  in  Salt  Lake  City 
on  account  of  the  "move  south"  due  to 
the  approach  of  the  Johnston  Army. 
In  1861  the  family  moved  to  St.  George, 


Utah,  where  Moroni  was  reared  and 
educated.  He  was  baptized  July  5, 
1866,  by  his  father  and  in  1877  was 
ordained  an  Elder;  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  17,  1882,  by  John  D. 
T.  McAllister.  At  St.  George  Bro. 
Snow  acted  as  president  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  and  later  as  a  member  of  the 
Stake  Board  of  that  organization.  In 
1879  and  1880  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain,  where  he  assisted  in  the 
publication  of  a  new  edition  of  the 
"Doctrine  and  Covenants".  While  on 
this  mission,  in  company  with  Pres. 
Wm.  Budge,  he  visited  the  Scandina- 
vian Mission,  which  was  opened  by  his 
father  in  1850;  during  this  visit  Elder 
Andrew  Jenson  traveled  with  them  and 
acted  as  interpreter.    After  his  return 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


71 


from  this  mission  Elder  Snow  acted 
as  deputy  assessor  and  collector,  sur- 
veyor of  Washington  County,  superin- 
tendent of  schools,  recorder,  justice  of 
the  peace  and  alderman,  besides  at- 
tending to  numerous  Church  duties.  In 
1886  he  and  his  family  moved  to  Mil- 
ford,  Utah,  where  he  acted  as  post- 
master and  had  charge  of  the  Railroad 
Express.  Returning  to  Provo  in  1898 
he  served  as  Bishop  of  the  5th  Ward 
from  1902  to  1906  and  was  for  a  time 
a  member  of  the  Utah  Stake  High 
Council.  In  1908  he  moved  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  he  became  assist- 
ant superintendent  of  the  "Improve- 
ment Era"  and  general  secretary  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
which  position  he  held  for  about  nine- 
teen years.  He  was  one  of  the  organ- 
izers of  the  Consolidated  Wagon  and 
Machine  Company  in  Salt  Lake  City 
and  worked  in  the  office  of  that  com- 
pany for  many  years;  he  also  acted 
as  a  member  of  the  High  Council  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake. 

In  1882  (Sept.  13th)  he  married  Em- 
ma Adelaide  Gates  in  the  St.  George 
Temple.  She  was  the  daughter  of 
Jacob  Gates  and  Emma  Fausberry, 
born  in  St.  George  Aug.  22,  1862.  This 
union  was  blessed  with  nine  children, 
namely,  Moroni  M.,  Mark  A.,  Wash- 
ington Irving,  Vivian,  Erma,  Leah, 
Leslie,  Clifford  and  Jacob  G. 

Elder  Snow  died  January  18,  1935, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  survived  by  his  wife, 
five  sons  and  two  daughters. 

STIMPSON,  Joseph  Henry,  clerk  of 
the  Weber  Stake,  president  of  the 
Japan  Mission,  etc.,  was  born  June 
12,  1885,  at  Riverdale,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  William  Stimpson 
and  Ann  Mary  Christensen.  He  was 
baptized  on  his  eighth  birthday  anni- 
versary (June  12,  1893)  by  his  father 
who  also  confirmed  him  a  member  of 
the  Church  on  the  same  day,  and  or- 
dained him  a  Deacon  June  20,  1897, 
and  an  Elder  February  7,  1904.  After 
attending  the  grade  schools,  he  entered 
the  Weber  Stake  Academy  in  1899  and 


in  1903  graduated  from  the  Normal 
Course  in  that  institution,  but  con- 
tinued another  year  taking  a  special 
course  in  language,  history  and  mathe- 
matics, during  which  time  he  was  edi- 
tor-in-chief of  the  "Acorn,"  the  school 
publication.  During  the  winters  of 
1904-1905  and  1905-1906  he  taught 
school  in  Ogden  city.  On  November 
23,  1906,  he  left  his  home  in  response 
to  a  call  to  fill  a  mission  in  Japan.  He 
labored  in  the  Kofu  Conference  and 


taught  English  six  hours  per  week  at 
the  Kofu  Commercial  School  for  three 
seasons.  After  returning  home  in 
July,  1912,  he  was  employed  in  the 
clothing  department  of  W.  S.  Wright 
and  Sons  Company  of  Ogden.  During 
this  time  he  acted  as  ward  clerk  of 
the  Riverdale  Ward;  previously  he  had 
been  very  active  in  Sunday  School 
work,  serving  as  superintendent  of  the 
Riverdale  Ward  Sunday  school  for 
some  time. 

On  Oct.  21,  1914,  he  married  Mary 
Emeline  Allen,  daughter  of  William- 
Allen  and  Polly  Child  (born  at  River- 
dale, Utah,  March  11,  1894),  who  four 
months  later  accompanied  him  to 
Japan. 

On  Oct.  27,  1914,  Elder  Stimpson 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Pres. 


72 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Lewis  W,  Shurtliff  and  set  apart  as  an 
alternate  member  of  the  Weber  Stake 
High  Council,  but  was  later  released 
being  again  called  on  a  mission  to 
Japan.  On  Feb.  15,  1915.  he  was  set 
apart  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  to  suc- 
ceel  Elder  R.  Grant  Ivins  as  presiden' 
of  the  Japan  Mission.  While  on  thif 
mission  three  children  were  born  to 
Bro.  Stimpson  and  his  wife,  namely. 
Joseph  Allen  (b.  Aug.  13,  1915),  Wil- 
liam Eldon  (b.  Nov.  6,  1917)  and  Inex 
Ei  (b.  June  11,  1919).  While  Bro 
Stimpson  was  presiding  over  this  mis- 
sion Apostle  David  O.  McKay  anr' 
Elder  Hugh  J.  Cannon  visited  Japar 
on  their  trip  around  the  world.  Re 
turning  home  in  1921,  Elder  Stimpson 
acted  as  a  member  of  the  superintend- 
ency  of  the  Rivei'dale  Sunday  school 
until  June,  1922,  when  the  Weber  Stake 
was  divided  and  Elder  Stimpson  ap- 
pointed clerk  of  the  Weber  Stake. 

Bro.  Stimpson's  wife,  Sister  Mary 
E.  Allen  Stimpson,  is  also  an  active 
Church  worker,  having  served  as  as- 
sistant secretary  and  teacher  in  Sun- 
day school,  teacher  in  Relief  Society, 
ward  organist,  etc,  and  is  at  present  a 
member  of  the  Weber  Stake  Primary 
Board.  After  her  return  from  Japan 
three  more  children  were  born,  namely, 
Mary  Ai  (b.  June  21,  1921),  and  Ed- 
ward and  Ellen  (who  both  died  in  in- 
fancy). Bro.  Stimpson  is  employed  as 
bookkeeper  for  the  Consultor  Cigar 
Company  of  Ogden,  a  position  which 
he  has  held  for  twelve  years, 

TAYLOR,  John  Harris,  one  of  the 

first  seven  presidents  of  Seventies  and 
a  member  of  the  general  board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  L  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  June  28, 1875,  the  son  of  Thomas 
E.  Taylor  and  Emma  Louise  Harris. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  of 
age  in  the  old  Endowment  House  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  being  active  in 
the  Church  from  his  boyhood  days, 
John  H.  was  ordained  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon  Dec.  9,  1889;  Teacher  Sept.  29, 
1803,    and    Priest    July    6,    1894.      On 


Jan.  5,  1896,  he  was  ordained  to  the 
office  of  an  Elder  by  Edward  Wm. 
Davis.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Jan.  24,  1896,  by  Apostle  Heber  J. 
Grant,  and  during  the  two  following 
years  filled  a  mission  to  England,  dur- 
ing which  time  hij  labored  as  a  travel- 
ing Elder  and  later  as  secretary  of  the 
Nottingham  Conference.  After  his 
return  from  this  mission  he  attended 
the  Chicago  College  of  Dental  Surgery 
at  Chicago,  111.,  from  which  institution 
he  graduated  in  1901,  after  which  he 
practiced  his  profession  in  Salt  Lake 
City.    In  1907-1909,  he  filled  a  mission 


to  Holland  and  presided  over  the  Bel- 
gian Conference  of  the  Netherlands 
Mission  for  a  year  and  a  half. 

While  residing  in  the  14th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Bro.  Taylor  acted  as 
president  of  a  Deacons'  quorum  and 
assistant  superintendent,  and  later 
as  superintendent  of  the  Sunday 
school.  In  1900  he  located  in  Forest 
Dale,  where  he  acted  as  assistant  su- 
perintendent of  the  Sunday  school  and 
as  pi-esident  of  the  105th  Quorum  of 
Seventy.  On  Sept.  20,  1911,  he  was 
sustained  a  member  of  the  general 
board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  called  to 
take  charge  of  athletic  work  for  that 
organization  throughout  the  Church. 
Later,  he  was  sustained  as  scout  com- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


73 


missioner  and  appointed  special  scout 
commissioner  for  the  Church,  repre- 
senting the  national  organization  of 
the  Boy  Scouts  of  America. 

In  1923,  Dr.  Taylor  was  called  to 
preside  over  the  Northern  States  Mis- 
sion, with  headquarters  at  Chicago,  Il- 
linois, and  upon  being  released  from 
that  position  in  1928,  he  and  his  wife 
were  called  to  take  charge  of  the  Mis- 
sionary Home  in  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
missionaries  receive  training  from  one 
to  two  weeks,  preparatory  to  leaving 
on   their  missions. 

In  1900  (Sept.  20th)  Bro.  Taylor 
married  Susan  Rachel  Grant  (daugh- 
ter of  Heber  J.  Grant  and  Lucy  String- 
ham),  born  Aug.  30,  1878.  This  mar- 
riage, which  took  place  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  has  been  blessed  with 
two  children,  namely,  Lucy  and  Heber 
Grant  Taylor. 

Dr.  Taylor  has  a  pleasing  personal- 
ity and  is  eminently  fitted  for  the  po- 
sition he  now  holds;  he  wields  a  great 
influence  for  good  over  the  young  peo- 
ple with  whom  he  comes  in  contact  in 
the  mission  home,  in  which  work  he 
is  ably  assisted  by  his  wife. 

In  the  General  Conference  of  the 
Church  held  in  1933,  he  was  sustained 
as  one  of  the  seven  presidents  of 
Seventy.  He  was  set  apart  to  that 
position  by  President  Heber  J.  Grant. 

TAYLOR,  Moses  Whittaker,  presi- 
dent of  Summit  Stake,  was  born  March 
9,  1862,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Pres.  John  Taylor  and  Sophia 
Whittaker.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  2, 
1877,  received  a  good  education,  was 
ordained  to  the  different  grades  of  the 
Holy  Priesthood  and  was  an  active 
member  of  the  Church  from  his  earli- 
est youth.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  George  M.  Cannon,  Nov.  9,  1885,  a 
Seventy  by  Geotge  G.  Bywater,  March 
8,  1886,  a  High  Priest  by  Reed  Smoot, 
May  6,  1901.  For  some  time  he  acted 
as  a  president  in  the  3rd  Quorum  of 
Seventy  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1890-93.  In  1885 
(Nov.  11th)  he  married  Sarah  Stewart 


Campbell.  This  union  was  blessed 
with  eleven  children,  namely,  Moses 
Campbell,  Elliott  Campbell,  Erminie 
Campbell,  Earl  Campbell,  Bayard 
Campbell,  Heber  Campbell,  Spencer 
Campbell,  Miriam  Campbell,  Aaron 
Campbell,  Afton  Campbell  and  Jean 
Campbell.  His  children  were  all  mar- 
ried in  the  Temple  and  have  family 
groups  of  their  own. 

In  1901  he  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Summit  Stake  of  Zion,  succeeding 
the  late  William  W.  Cluff  in  that  posi- 


tion. During  his  administration  he 
worked  faithfully  to  improve  condi- 
tions in  the  Summit  Stake  of  Zion  and 
introduced  several  industries  which 
tended  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the 
Saints  in  that  section  of  country.  His 
health  failing,  he  received  an  honor- 
able release  in  1921,  and  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Jan.  13,  1922.  (For  further 
details  see  Jenson's  Biographical  Man- 
uscripts.) 

TINGEY,  Joseph  Stafiford,  Bishop 
of  the  Farmer's  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Co., 
Utah,  was  born  July  16,  1857,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Bishop 
John  Tingey  and  Phebe  Stafford.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  3,  1867,  by  Thomas 
Higgs  and  took  an  active  part  in  the 
Sunday   school,   Y.   M.   M.   I.   A.   and 


74 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


other  organizations  in  the  17th  Ward. 
He  was  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  21, 
1876,  by  Peter  O.  Hansen  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1880,  la- 
boring first  as  a  traveling  Elder  in 
the  Newcastle  and  Durham  confer- 
ences and  subsequently  in  the  Birm- 
ingham Conference.  While  laboring 
as  a  missionary  in  Great  Britain  his 
health  was  greatly  impaired,  and  for 
a  number  of  years  afterwards  he  suf- 
fered  more   or   less   from   ill   health. 


-■^?$"5»?^>.^- 


While  laboring  in  the  Birmingham 
Conference  he  assisted  in  the  burial 
of  Elder  Wm.  H.  Butler  of  Weber 
County,  Utah,  who  in  the  winter  of 
1881-1882  was  stricken  with  disease. 
Elder  Butler  was  the  third  missionary 
from  Utah  to  be  buried  in  the  same 
grave,  the  other  two  being  James  H. 
Flanigan  who  died  in  1857  and  Caleb 
Parry  who  died  in  1863.  During  his 
labors  as  a  missionary  Elder  Tingey 
witnessed  many  remarkable  mani- 
festations of  the  power  of  God,  in 
conversions,  gift  of  tongues,  interpre- 
tation of  tongues,  prophecy  and  heal- 
ing of  the  sick.  While  in  England 
he  also  visited  many  parts  of  that 
country  in  successful  genealogical  re- 
search, and  also  visited  France. 

After  returning  home  from  his  mis- 
sion he  became  an  active  member  in 


the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  and  in  the  17th  Ward  Sunday 
school  he  acted  as  librarian,  teacher 
of  the  theological  department,  and 
later  when  he  changed  his  residence 
to  Farmers  Ward  he  acted  as  Sunday 
school  superintendent.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Oct.  28,  1885,  by 
George  G.  Bywater  and  acted  as  a 
president  of  the  137th  Quorum  of  Sev- 
enty from  1891  to  1909.  After  being 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  28,  1909, 
by  Edwin  Bennion,  he  acted  as  first 
counselor  in  the  bishopric  of  the 
Farmers  Ward  until  Feb.  25,  1914, 
when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman,  after 
which  he  presided  over  the  Farmers 
Ward  until  his  death  which  occurred 
July  25,  1923. 

Besides  his  numerous  ecclesiastical 
positions,  Bishop  Tingey  held  a  num- 
ber of  civil  offices,  among  which  may 
be  mentioned  his  position  as  trustee 
of  the  40th  school  district  in  Salt  Lake 
County.  He  was  a  printer  by  trade 
and  was  for  many  years  foreman  of 
the  Deseret  News  Job  Printing  De- 
partment. From  his  earliest  youth 
he  was  a  diligent  and  faithful  Church 
worker  and  often  exerted  himself  al- 
most beyond  his  physical  powers. 

In  1884  (Sept.  30th),  he  married 
Martha  J.  Home,  daughter  of  Joseph 
and  M.  Isabella  Home,  who  for  many 
years  was  general  president  of  the 
Young  Ladies  Mutual  .  Improvement 
Associations  in  the  Church.  This  mar- 
riage was  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely,  Joseph  S.,  jun.,  William  H., 
Clara  H.,  and  Clarence  H.  (twins), 
Weiler  H.  and  Stafford  H.  (twins  who 
died  in  infancy),  and  Rulon  H.  His 
son  Clarence  H.  has  presided  over  the 
Australian  Mission  since  1927. 

TINGEY,  Martha  Jane  Home,  gen- 
eral president  of  the  Young  Ladies 
Mutual  Improvement  Association  of 
the  Church  from  1905  to  1929,  was 
born  Oct.  15,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  Joseph  Home 
and  Mary  Isabella  Hales.  She  received 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


75 


her  education  in  private  schools  and 
in  the  Deseret  University,  now  the 
University  of  Utah.  Sister  Martha 
was  baptized  by  her  father  when 
eight  years  old  and  has  since  her 
earliest  youth  been  a  diligent  Church 
worker,  a  teacher  in  the  Sunday 
school  and  an  officer  in  the  Primary 
Association  and  Y.  L.  M,  I.  A.  For 
several  years  she  acted  as  counselor 


in  the  14th  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  and 
in  1880  was  chosen  as  second  counselor 
to  Sister  Elmina  S.  Taylor,  general 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
whole  Church.  In  April,  1905,  Sister 
Tingey  succeeded  Sister  Taylor  as 
general  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A., 
which  position  she  held  until  April, 
1929,  when,  at  her  own  request,  she 
was  honorably  released  on  account  of 
ill  health.  Sister  Tingey  was  a  suc- 
cessful presiding  officer,  and  during 
the  many  years  she  stood  at  the  head 
of  all  the  young  ladies  of  the  Church, 
she  made  a  remarkable  record  for 
diligence  and  faithful  discharge  of 
duty.  Her  counselors  were  Ruth  M. 
Fox  and  May  Taylor  Nystrom.  Sister 
Nystrom  was  released  due  to  her  re- 
moval from  the  city,  and  Sister  Lucy 
Grant  Cannon  succeeded  her  as  second 
counselor.  After  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
of  the  Church  became  affiliated  with 


the  National  Council  of  Women,  Pres. 
Tingey  made  several  trips  to  Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  Seattle  (Washington), 
Chicago  (Illinois),  New  York,  Cali- 
fornia and  other  states,  representing 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  at  the  National 
Council  of  Women  on  several  occa- 
sions. On  Sept.  30,  1884,  she  was 
married  to  Joseph  S.  Tingey  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  seven  children, 
five  of  whom  are  still  living. 

Sister  Tingey  is  gifted  in  music  and 
has  natural  elocutionary  powers,  and 
being  possessed  of  a  rare  memory, 
while  still  quite  young,  she  was  in  con- 
stant demand  for  public  and  private 
entertainments.  Although  giving 
much  of  her  time  and  attention  to  her 
Church  duties.  Sister  Tingey  has  al- 
ways been  a  devoted  wife  and  mother. 
(See  also  "Young  Woman's  Journal," 
Vol.  2,  pp.  307-311.) 

TOONE,  Claudius  Conrad,  Bishop 
of  the  Croyden  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Morgan  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  25, 
1902,  at  Croyden,  the  son  of  John 
Wilford  Toone  and  Harriet  B.  Grover. 
He  was  baptized  June  17,  1911,  by 
Wm.  H.  Toone,  was  raised  in  Croy- 
den and  there  received  a  common 
school  education;  later  he  graduated 
from  the  High  School  at  Morgan.  He 
was  ordained  a  Deacon,  Teacher  and 
Priest  successively;  ordained  an  Elder 
April  22,  1923,  by  Bishop  James  Mel- 
vin  Toone,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1924-1926,  laboring 
in  South  Carolina.  Before  going  on 
this  mission  he  had  acted  in  the  Sun- 
day school  superintendency  of  the 
Croyden  Ward,  and  on  June  17,  1926, 
ne  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Croy- 
den Ward.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  26,  1926,  by 
Patriarch  Hyrum  G.  Smith.  In  1927 
^ March  9),  he  married  Hazel  Carlson 
Child  of  Clinton,  Utah,  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  Their  children  are 
Keith  Wilford,  born  April  17.  1928. 
and  Velma,  born  July  6,  1930.  Bishop 
Toone  is  a  farmer  and  rancher  by 
avocation. 


76 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


TOONE,  George  Ernest,  2nd  Bish- 
op of  the  Starline  Ward,  Lethbridge 
Stake,  Alberta,  Canada,  was  born 
March  28,  1881,  in  Croydon,  Morgan 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  H. 
Toone  and  Hannah  Webb.  He  was 
baptized  June  8,  1889,  by  Thomas  R. 
Condie  at  Croyden;  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher 
and  Elder,  the  latter  ordination  taking 
place  Feb.  2,  1903.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  from  1903- 
1905,  laboring  in  southern  Illinois.  In 
1906  (June  27),  he  married  Elizabeth 
Grace  Mulholland  in  the  Salt  Lake- 
Temple.  The  children  by  this  mar- 
riage are  the  following:  Jean  Eliz- 
abeth and  Grace  Ernestine  (twins), 
Hannah  Ellen,  William  Ernest,  James 
Edward  and  David  Adam  (twins), 
Henri  Alvin,  Reed  Avard,  Leo  Eugene, 
and  Pauline  Alida.  After  returning 
from  his  mission  he  moved  from  Croy- 
den and  resided  temporarily  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  but  moved  to  Canada  in 
1908,  and  located  in  the  Starline  Ward, 
where  he  acted  as  the  first  ward 
superintendent  of  the  Sunday  school 
from  1909  to  1912.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  14,  1912,  and  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  18,  1912  by  Apostle  Orson 
F.  Whitney.  Under  his  able  admin- 
istration the  Starline  Ward  prospered, 
and  Brother  Toone  became  known  as 
a  successful  presiding  officer,  labor- 
ing faithfully  and  true  for  his  Church 
and  his  people  until  he  was  honorably 
released  in  1929  and  chosen  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Lethbridge  Stake  High 
Council,  which  position  he  still  occu- 
pies. Brother  Toone  was  raised  and 
schooled  in  Croyden  and  later  studied 
at  the  L.  D.  S.  University  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  He  has  filled  many  responsible 
positions  in  the  communities  in  which 
he  has  resided,  and  served  as  school 
trustee  in  the  Starline  district  for 
many  years.  He  is  a  farmer  by  occu- 
pation and  is  the  owner  of  two  sec- 
tions of  some  of  the  best  wheat  land 
in  the  province  of  Alberta. 

VAN  COTT,  Annie  Anderson,  gene- 
alogist and  historian,  was  born  Nov. 


12,  1882,  in  Skouby,  Aarhus  Amt, 
Denmark,  the  daughter  of  Ole  Ander- 
son and  Minnie  Nielsen.  She  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1884,  together  with 
her  parents  and  a  brother  six  months 
old,  and  settled  in  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah  Co.  In  1895-1897  her  father 
filled  a  mission  to  Denmark,  leaving  a 
wife  and  eight  small  children.  On  his 
return  Annie,  at  the  age  of  14  years, 
went  to  Salt  Lake  City  to  do  house 
work,  and  there  she  has  spent  the 
greater  part  of  her  life.  She  was 
always   anxious   to   obtain   an   educa- 


tion and  so  worked  for  her  schooling 
through  the  eight  grades,  and  about 
three  years  at  the  University  of  Utah. 
In  1905  she  was  married  to  Frank  V. 
Van  Cott,  a  son  of  John  Van  Cott,  by 
whom  she  became  the  mother  of  six 
children.  While  Sister  Van  Cott  has 
spent  a  great  deal  of  her  time  en- 
deavoring to  raise  her  children  in  the 
fear  of  the  Lord,  she  has  also  tried 
to  do  outside  work.  Always  having  a 
desire  to  study  and  progress,  she  has 
taken  advantage  of  every  opportunity 
to  do  so.  The  Lord  has  said,  "The 
Glory  of  God  is  Intelligence"  and 
"seek  learning  by  study."  This  has 
been  Sister  Van  Cott's  guide.  When 
she  married  she  had  not  finished  her 
high  school,  so  after  she  had  had  her 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


77 


children,  she  began  to  take  some  uni- 
versity work,  first  by  correspondence 
and  later  attended  the  classes.  Dur- 
ing the  years  of  1925  to  1927  she 
worked  out  eight  hours  a  day  to  sup- 
port her  son  Frank  who  was  filling 
a  mission  in  Denmark.  She  wanted 
to  keep  pace  with  her  childi'en  in 
their  school  work  and  so  continued 
her  studies  at  the  University.  In 
June,  1930,  she  succeeded  in  getting 
her  B.  A.  degree  along  with  her 
daughter,  Helen.  She  believes  that 
this  was  the  first  time  in  the  history 
of  education  in  Utah  that  a  mother 
and  daughter  received  their  degrees 
at  the  same  time  from  a  state  uni- 
versity. The  next  year,  while  Helen 
was  teaching,  Sister  Van  Cott  con- 
tinued at  the  University  and  in  June, 
1931,  obtained  her  master's  degree  in 
history.  Sister  Van  Cott  has  also 
been  a  diligent  Church  worker.  From 
1903  to  1905  she  was  a  Sunday  school 
and  Mutual  teacher  in  the  11th  Ward. 
In  1906  she  moved  to  the  33rd  Ward, 
where  she  has  since  resided.  She  im- 
mediately became  a  teacher  in  the 
Primary  class,  serving  four  years. 
Altogether  she  has  spent  ten  years  as 
a  Sunday  school  teacher,  nine  years 
as  a  teacher  and  counselor  in  the 
Mutuals,  four  years  as  principal  of 
religion  classes,  six  years  as  theo- 
logical teacher  in  the  Relief  Society, 
two  years  as  secretary  of  the  teacher 
training  class,  and  three  years  as  a 
ward  missionary.  From  1905  to  the 
present  time  she  has  been  much  en- 
gaged in  Temple  and  genealogical 
work  and  has  had  Temple  work  done 
for  over  4,000  names  of  the  Van  Cott 
family.  She  is  now  engaged  in  writ- 
ing a  Van  Cott  history  and  genealogy. 
On  Jan.  20,  1925,  she  was  set  apart  as 
a  member  of  the  ward  genealogical 
committee,  having  charge  of  the  junior 
Temple  excursions  in  the  ward,  and 
in  September,  1928,  she  was  made 
secretary  of  the  committee,  which 
position  she  still  holds.  In  the  sum- 
mer of  1927  she  went  on  a  trip  to 
Scandinavia  with  her  mother  who  was 


going  on  a  mission.  Her  father  and 
son,  Frank,  were  there  on  missions. 
She  returned  home  with  her  son.  "To 
be  happy  be  busy,"  is  her  motto. 

WALTON,  James,  3rd  Bishop  of 
the  Tremonton  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  1,  1888,  at  Porterville,  Mor- 
gan Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Charles 
Alonzo  Walton  and  Louisa  Ann 
Buchanan.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  29, 
1897,  by  William  E.  Chappell,  or- 
dained a  Deacon  March  27,  1901,  by 
his  father,  ordained  a  Priest  March  4, 
1906,  by  Edward  H.  Rhead,  ordained 
an  Elder  March  15,  1909,  by  William 
Z.  Terry,  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  31, 
1915,  by  George  F.  Richards,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Feb.  12,  1928, 
by  Arthur  R.  Capener.  While  residing 
in  Summit  County,  Utah,  he  acted  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Stake  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  presidency.  In  1910-1912  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern  States, 
laboring  in  the  North  Indiana,  Chicago, 
and  the  Northern  Illinois  conferences, 
acting  as  president  of  the  latter  con- 
ference several  months.  After  return- 
ing home  he  acted  as  assistant  stake 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools  in 
the  Summit  Stake.  In  1914  (April  2), 
he  married  Effie  E.  Carruth  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple;  was  appointed 
bi'anch  manager  of  the  Consolidated 
Wagon  and  Machine  Co.  May  1,  1914; 
from  May  3,  1917,  to  May  3,  1919,  he 
served  in  the  U.  S.  Army  in  the  362nd 
Infantry  of  the  91st  division;  par- 
ticipated in  the  battles  in  St.  Mihiel 
and  Muese  Argonne  offensive.  He 
located  in  Tremonton  in  May,  1919, 
and  from  Oct.  10,  1919,  to  October, 
1922,  he  acted  as  president  of  the 
Tremonton  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  From 
1923  to  1925  he  served  on  the  Stake 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Board  as  first  assistant 
superintendent.  After  moving  to  Gar- 
land in  August,  1922,  he  acted  as 
assistant  Sunday  school  superintend- 
ent in  the  Garland  Ward.  On  Nov. 
20,  1927,  he  was  chosen  as  a  High 
Councilor    in   the    Bear   River    Stake, 


78 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


and  appointed  Bishop  of  Tremonton 
Ward  Dec.  11,  1927;  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Apostle  George  F. 
Richards  Nov.  11,  1928.     On  Oct.  30, 

1928,  he  purchased  the  Leader  Pub- 
lishing Company  at  Tremonton,  since 
which  time  he  has  been  editor  of  "Bear 
River  Valley  Leader."  His  first  wife 
died  May  27,  1927,  after  bearing  him 
one  child,  namely,  James  Carruth. 
Bishop  Walton  has  filled  many  im- 
portant positions  of  a  secular  nature; 
he  has  acted  as  mayor  of  Tremonton 
since  Dec.  11,  1927,  acted  as  president 
of  the  Tremonton  Commercial  Club 
from  1924  to  1925,  and  has  filled  nu- 
merous other  secular  positions  of 
honor  and  responsibility,  being 
throughout  a  man  of  affairs.    Aug.  9, 

1929,  Bishop  Walton  married  Isabella 
Pack  in  the  Logan  Temple. 

WARNICK,  Wilford  Woodbury,  first 
president  of  the  Timpanogos  Stake, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  April  23, 
1880,  at  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Carl  Peter  Warnick  and  Christine 
Marie  Larsen.  He  was  raised  in  Pleas- 
ant Grove  where  he  was  baptized  Sept. 
9,  1888,  and  where  he  attended  the 
public  schools  and  later  studied  at  the 
University  of  Utah  and  still  later  at 
the  B.  Y.  University  at  Provo.  He 
was  ordained  successively  to  the  offices 
of  Deacon,  Priest  (Nov.  28,  1898,  by 
Millen  D.  Atwood),  Elder  (September 
9,  1901,  by  Millen  D.  Atwood)  and 
Seventy  (May  14,  1905,  by  Fred 
Thorne).  Bro.  Warnick  labored  as 
ward  clerk  in  the  Manila  Ward  for  20 
years  and  also  as  an  officer  in  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  Sunday  School,  and 
Religion  Class,  as  a  counselor  in  the 
Elder's  quorum  in  Pleasant  Grove  and 
as  president  of  the  44th  Quorum  of 
Seventy.  He  filled  two  short  missions 
as  a  home  missionary  and  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Utah  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
Board  for  twenty  years,  part  of  the 
time  as  the  president.  On  August  31 
1924,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  by  Apostle  James  E.  Tal- 
mage  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Manila  Ward,  which  position  he 


held  until  July  1,  1928,  when  he  was 
set  apart  by  Apostle  Joseph  Fielding 
Smith  to  preside  over  the  Timpanogos 
Stake,  then  organized.  In  1903  (June 
17th)  he  married  Jeanette  Isabella 
Wadley  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple, 
which  union  has  been  blessed  with 
seven  children,  namely,  Jeanette,  Ethel 
Myrle,  Paul  Wilford  (dead),  Effie 
Mary,    Charles    William,    Helen    and 


Stephen  Lee.  President  Warnick  has 
held  many  positions  of  responsibility 
in  a  civil  capacity  and  served  in  the 
senate  of  the  Utah  Legislature  in  1923 
and  1925.  He  taught  school  for  five 
years,  but  is  otherwise  a  farmer  and 
stock  raiser  by  avocation. 

WEED,  Charles  Leonard,  5th  Bishop 

of  the  26th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  (Pioneer  Stake),  was  born  Sept. 
1,  1867,  at  Vestra  Ryd  parish,  Upsala 
Ian,  Sweden,  the  son  of  Erick  Wilhelm 
Weed  and  Johanna  Susanna  Flink. 
Having  a  desire  to  try  his  fortune  in 
the  new  world,  he  emigrated  to  Amer- 
ica in  1887  in  advance  of  the  rest  of 
his  father's  family,  and  after  stopping 
a  short  time  in  New  York  City  and 
after  the  family  had  also  arrived  in 
America,  they  moved  into  the  country 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


79 


and  resided  successively  in  Delaware 
and  Otsego  counties,  New  York  While 
residing  at  Franklin,  Delaware  County, 
"Mormonism"  found  the  family  and 
here  young  Charles  was  baptized  April 
5,  1903,  by  Thomas  Richardson,  an 
Elder  from  Zion.  Soon  afterwards  he 
was  ordained  a  Priest,  and  at  a  con- 
ference held  in  Albany  the  same  year 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  John 
G.  McQuarrie,  president  of  the  Eastern 


States  Mission.  For  a  short  time  he 
assisted  the  Elders  in  holding  street 
meetings  and  otherwise,  and  then  emi- 
grated to  Utah,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City  in  October,  1903.  His  first  home 
in  Utah  was  in  the  16th  Ward,  from 
which  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States  in  1908-1910  and  presided 
a  part  of  the  time  over  the  New  York 
Conference.  After  his  return  from 
that  mission,  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  Levi  Edgar  Young  and  became 
a  president  in  the  110th  Quorum  of 
Seventy.  While  residing  in  the  16th 
Ward,  he  acted  as  assistant  superin- 
tendent of  the  Ward  Sunday  school, 
and  after  he  had  moved  into  the  26th 
Ward  in  1912,  he  acted  as  assistant 
Sunday  school  superintendent  in  that 
ward  and  later  was  superintendent 
of  the  ward  Sunday  school  for  eight 
years.    He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 


by  Elder  William  McLachlan,  presi- 
dent of  the  Pioneer  Stake,  April  2, 
1916,  after  which  he  acted  as  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  William  Miller  of 
the  High  Priest's  Quorum,  and  after- 
wards as  president  of  said  quorum  in 
the  Pioneer  Stake.  On  March  3,  1926, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
George  Albert  Smith  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  26th  Ward  (Pioneer 
Stake),  succeeding  Kershaw  N.  White, 
who  had  removed  to  another  ward. 
Before  emigrating  to  Utah,  and  while 
living  in  Otsego  County,  New  York, 
he  married  Ella  Matilda  Erikson, 
daughter  of  Erik  Erikson  and  Char- 
lotte Akerlof,  a  native  of  Sweden,  who 
bore  him  four  children,  namely,  Char- 
les Emil,  Floyd  Leonard,  Harold  Erik- 
son and  Alma  Waldo.  Before  leaving 
Sweden  Bro.  Weed  learned  the  trade 
of  a  machinist,  which  vocation  he  fol- 
lowed most  of  his  life.  He  was  die 
machinist  for  the  Utah  Products  Com- 
pany for  five  years  and  later  engineer 
for  the  Zions  Securities  Corporation. 
He  died  in  1934,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah. 

WILLIAMS,  Thomas  Allen,  fifth 
Bishop  of  the  12th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  was  born  Jan.  22,  1861,  in 
Draper,  Salt  Lake  Co.  Utah,  the  son 
of  Thomas  V.  Williams  and  Pernecy 
F.  Allen.  He  was  baptized  by  Edward 
Snelgrove  in  March,  1869,  and,  taking 
an  active  part  in  Church  work  from  his 
early  youth,  he  was  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Elder, 
Seventy  and  High  Priest.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  his  father  and  a 
High  Priest  in  1904  by  Angus  M.  Can- 
non. After  serving  as  2nd  counselor 
to  Bishop  Hiram  B.  Clawson  he  acted 
as  Bishop  of  the  12th  Ward  from  1904 
to  1908.  Since  the  amalgamation  of 
the  12th-13th  Ward  he  has  acted  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Ensign  Stake.  In  1887-88  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States,  labor- 
ing principally  in  West  Virginia,  Mary- 
land and  Virginia.  For  many  years 
he  presided  over  all  the  Deacons  in  the 


80 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


12th  Ward,  under  the  direction  of 
Bishop  Alexander  C.  Pyper.  He  was 
also  a  diligent  and  successful  Sunday 
school  officer  and  teacher  for  nearly 
forty  years.  In  a  secular  capacity  he 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Pure  Food 
Bureau  and  as  a  member  of  the  Board 
of  the  State  Industrial  School  at  Og- 
den,  Utah.  At  present  he  is  a  member 
of  the  Board  of  Regents  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah.     Bro.   Williams   re- 


ceived a  good  education,  and  after  go- 
ing through  all  the  grades  of  the  com- 
mon school,  he  attended  the  University 
of  Utah.  From  1881  to  1895  he  acted 
as  manager  of  the  tinware  and  glass- 
ware department  of  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  and 
after  that  was  employed  as  manager 
of  the  Utah  Stove  and  Hardware 
Company  until  1895.  Still  later  he  was 
sales  agent  for  several  hardware 
manufacturers.  Bro.  Williams  has 
traveled  considerably  through  the 
United  States,  Canada,  Cuba,  Hawaii 
and  Alaska.  At  present  he  is  an  active 
and  influential  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Ensign  Stake  of  Zion 
and  is  otherwise  prominently  con- 
nected with  a  number  of  ecclesiastical 
and  civil  activities  in  the  community. 
In  1883  (Nov.  22nd)  he  married 
Susan,  daughter  of  John  R.  Winder 
and  Ellen  Walter.    This  union  has  been 


blessed  with  eight  children,  namely, 
Clare,  Thomas  Allen  (died  in  infancy), 
Jean,  Edna,  Gilbert  Winder,  Frank 
Winder,  Rex  Winder  and  Allen  Winder. 

WILSON,  George  Albert  (sen.),  1st 

Bishop  of  the  Ely  Ward,  Nevada 
Stake,  White  Pine  Co.,  Nevada,  was 
born  Feb.  19,  1891,  in  Logan,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Ellis 
Wilson  and  Lerona  A.  Martin.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  12,  1899,  by  Sam- 
uel G.  Spillman,  and  ordained  a  Priest 
March  2,  1908,  by  his  father,  who  also 
ordained  him  an  Elder  Nov.  22,  1910. 
Brother  Wilson  filled  a  mission  to 
Australia  from  1910  to  1912,  laboring 
principally  in  Adelaide,  South  Aus- 
tralia. In  1917  (June  12),  he  married 
Myrtle  Brown  in  Logan;  this  union 
has  been  blessed  with  5  children, 
namely,  George  A.,  jun.,  Jay,  Evelyn, 
Louise  and  Mae.  Brother  Wilson 
acted  as  stake  superintendent  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Malad  Stake 
from  1922  to  1925.  When  the  Nevada 
Stake  of  Zion  was  organized  Sept.  19, 
1926,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  by  Apostle  Rudger  Claw- 
son  and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Ely  Ward,  which  was  organized  at 
that  time,  the  Saints  in  Ely  having 
previously  been  organized  into  a 
branch  of  the  Church.  Brother  Wil- 
son acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Ely  Ward 
until  July,  1930,  since  which  he  has 
acted  as  a  member  of  the  Nevada 
Stake  High  Council.  From  his  earliest 
youth  Bishop  Wilson  has  been  a  dili- 
gent Church  worker  and  is  still  taking 
an  active  part  as  a  teacher  in  the 
Ward  Sunday  school  and  in  Priest- 
hood classes.  While  laboring  as  a 
missionary  in  South  Australia  he  paid 
particular  attention  to  the  young 
members  of  the  Church  and  acted  for 
some  time  as  president  of  the  Subiaco 
Mutual  Improvement  Association. 
Bishop  Wilson  is  by  profession  a 
chiropractor,  having  practiced  that 
branch  of  medical  science  since  June, 
1918.  Dr.  Wilson  moved  with  his 
family  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  Septem- 
ber, 1931. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


81 


ALLRED,  Rodney  Chase,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Lehi  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  Aug,  2, 
1883,  at  Lehi,  Utah  County,  Utah,  the 
son  of  James  AHred  and  Kate  Jones. 
He  was  raised  in  Lehi  and  educated  in 
the  public  schools  of  that  town,  and 
later  studied  four  years  in  the  B.  Y. 
University  of  Provo,  and  later  gradu- 
ated from  the  U.  A.  C.  at  Logan.  Tak- 
ing a  leading  part  in  Church  affairs 
from  his  early  youth,  he  was  ordained 
a  Deacon,  March  10,  1900,  by  Andrew 
A.   Peterson;    ordained  a  Priest,  Jan. 


13,  1902,  by  Fred.  Merrill;  ordained  an 
Elder,  April  18,  1910,  by  Fred.  Scholes; 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  from 
1913  to  1915,  laboring  principally  in 
the  Maori  Agricultural  College  in  Kor- 
ongota  near  Hastings,  as  teacher  and 
manager  of  the  college  farm.  On 
this  mission  he  was  accompanied  by 
his  wife,  Hilda  A.  Carlson,  whom  he 
married  Sept.  7,  1910,  in  the  Logan 
Temple.  Two  of  their  children  (Venice 
Moreho  and  Huitau  La  Priel)  were 
born  in  Hastings,  New  Zealand.  An- 
other of  their  children  (Phylis  Arlene) 
was  born  at  Glenwood  Springs,  Colo- 
rado, and  Rodney  Chase,  Jr.,  and 
Anna   were    born   in    Lehi    and    John 


Ralph  was  born  in  Syracuse,  Utah. 
Soon  after  returning  from  his  mission 
to  New  Zealand  he  went  to  Colorado 
as  agricultural  agent  for  the  Federal 
Government,  serving  in  that  capacity 
in  1917-1920,  with  headquarters  at 
Glenwood  Springs.  After  returning 
to  Utah  he  acted  as  a  home  missionary 
in  the  Alpine  Stake,  was  president  of 
the  Lehi  Second  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
was  ordained  a  Seventy,  July  31,  1921, 
and  later  became  a  president  of  the 
127th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest,  July  1,  1928,  by 
Apostle  Stephen  L.  Richards  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  in  the  Lehi 
Stake  presidency.  Prior  to  this  he 
taught  school  in  the  Nephi  High 
School  1910-1913,  and  later  taught  in 
the  Jordan  High  School,  and  in  1922- 
1925  in  the  North  Davis  High  School. 
In  1933-1934  he  filled  a  short  term 
mission  in  the  North  Western  States, 
laboring  principally  in  the  city  of 
Portland. 

ANDERSON,      Andrew      Bjerring. 

president  of  High  Priests'  Quorum  of 
the  Lehi  Stake,  was  born  in  Ephraim, 


Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  Sept.  14,  1866,  the 
second  son  of  Andrew  R.  Andersen  and 


Vol.  IV,  No.  6 


November,  1935 


82 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


his  wife  Mary  Ann  Pedersen  (who 
emigrated  to  Utah  from  Denmark  in 
1862).  Young  Andrew  was  baptized 
Oct.  17,  1875,  by  Thomas  Hawkins, 
was  ordained  an  Elder  in  his  youth  by 
his  father,  and  ordained  a  Seventy 
Nov.  10,  1889,  by  John  Morgan. 
On  July  4,  1898  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  Abram 
Owen  Woodruff  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  John  N. 
Davis  of  Vernal  Ward.  In  1907  he 
moved  to  Lehi,  and  from  that  time 
until  1920,  while  continuing  his 
studies,  he  carried  on  a  successful 
farming  and  dairying  business.  In 
1923  he  was  called  to  act  as  an  alter- 
nate member  of  the  High  Council  of 
the  Alpine  Stake  and  from  1926  to 
1928  sei'ved  as  a  member  of  that  coun- 
cil. He  also  acted  as  president  of  the 
High  Pi'iests'  Quorum  of  the  Alpine 
Stake.  On  July  1,  1928,  he  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  High  Priests' 
Quorum  of  the  newly  organized  Lehi 
Stake  of  Zion,  and  in  1931  and  1932 
filled  a  six  months'  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia. 

After  graduating  from  the  public 
schools  in  Lehi  in  1884,  he  attended 
the  Brigham  Young  Academy  at  Provo 
from  1884  to  1886,  and  from  1886  to 
1892  was  employed  by  Thomas  R.  Cut- 
ler in  the  People's  Cooperative  Insti- 
tution there.  Continuing  his  scholastic 
education,  Bro.  Anderson  was  awarded 
the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Pedagogy 
and  also  a  diploma  from  the  Commer- 
cial Depai'tment  of  the  B.  Y.  Academy 
in  1895,  after  which  he  served  as 
principal  of  the  Uintah  Stake  Acad- 
emy and  during  this  period  of  serv- 
ice (or  on  Dec.  29,  1895)  the  Church 
Board  of  Education  conferred  upon 
him  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Didac- 
tics (D.  B.).  From  1901  to  1907  he 
acted  as  principal  of  the  Beaver 
Branch  of  the  B.  Y.  Academy,  and 
during  the  same  period  served  as 
president  of  the  Academy  Branch  of 
the  Beaver  Ward.  In  1911  he  received 
a  diploma  of  High  School  grade  from 


the  State  of  Utah  and  in  1932  was 
elected  a  member  of  the  Board  of 
Education  of  the  Alpine  School  Dis- 
trict, 

Elder  Anderson  married  Hannah 
Evans  (daughter  of  Bishop  David 
Evans  and  Margaret  Holm),  in  the 
Manti  Temple  Sept.  12,  1888.  This 
union  has  been  blessed  with  five  chil- 
dren, namely,  Vernon  Andrew,  Leland 
David,  Maesa  LaRee,  Evans  Levere, 
and  Mary  Margaret. 

In  1908,  Bro.  Anderson  was  appoint- 
ed a  member  of  the  Pioneer  Monu- 
ment Committee  which  erected  a  hand- 
some monument  in  honor  of  the  pio- 
neers of  Lehi  and  published  a  com- 
prehensive history  of  Lehi.  This  is 
only  one  of  the  many  positions  in 
which  he  has  served  his  community 
and  the  State  of  Utah  in  a  generous 
and  efficient  manner. 

ANDERSON,  Evans  Levere,  super- 
intendent of  Sunday  Schools  in  the 
Lehi  Stake,  was  born  Sept.  17,  1897,  in 
Vernal.  Utah,  the  son  of  Andrew  B. 


X  "^^  ^\ 


Anderson  and  his  wife  Hannah  Evans. 
After  being  blessed  by  his  father,  Nov. 
7,  1897,  he  was  taught  the  principles 
of  the  gospel  and  was  baptized  by  his 
father  at  Beaver,  Utah,  Oct.  28,  1905. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


83 


The  family  moved  to  Lehi,  Utah 
County,  where  the  boy  attended 
school  and  in  due  time  graduated  from 
the  High  School  there.  Commencing  to 
labor  in  a  Church  capacity  he  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  by  his  father  Oct. 
18,  1909,  a  Teacher  by  George  Schow, 
Dec.  11,  1911,  and  an  Elder  by  his 
father,  Oct.  19,  1919;  these  ordina- 
tions all  taking  place  at  Lehi.  On 
Nov.  4,  1919,  he  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  Seymour  B.  Young. 

After  receiving  his  endowments  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple  Oct.  24,  1919, 
Bro.  Anderson  was  set  apart  Nov.  4, 
1919,  for  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States,  laboring  most  of  the  time  in 
the  two  Kansas  Cities  and  Sedalia, 
Missouri;  he  returned  from  this  mis- 
sion April  1,  1922.  On  Nov.  19,  1922, 
he  became  president  of  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  in  the  Lehi  Fifth  Ward.  Moving 
to  Lehi  First  Ward  he  served  as  2nd 
assistant  superintendent  in  the  Sun- 
day School  from  1926  to  1928.  On 
Aug.  23,  1928,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Apostle  Joseph  Fielding- 
Smith  and  set  apart  as  First  Coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Hyrum  A.  Anderson 
of  the  Lehi  1st  Ward.  From  this 
position  he  was  honorably  released 
March  10,  1935,  being  called  to  act  as 
superintendent  of  Sunday  schools  in 
the  Lehi  Stake. 

On  June  11,  1925,  Bro.  Anderson 
married  Liliane  Pernoux  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  three  children,  namely: 
Ralph  Evans;  Blaine  P.;  and  Melvin  P. 

Elder  Anderson  is  a  farmer  by  avo- 
cation and  also  active  in  the  dairy 
and  poultry  business.  He  served  as 
president  of  the  Lehi  Division  of  the 
Utah  Farm  Bureau  for  several  years 
and  also  as  president  of  the  Utah 
County  Farm  Bureau. 

ASMUSSEN,     Carl     Christian,     a 

prominent  Elder  in  the  Church  was 
born  May  20, 1825,  at  Kjoge,  Sjaelland, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Carl  Paulus 
Christian  Asmussen  and  Petra  Eliza- 


beth Henrietta  Johansen.  He  received 
his  education  in  Denmark  where  he 
served  his  apprenticeship  as  a  watch- 
maker. Later  he  established  himself 
as  a  watchmaker  in  Germany  and  also 
in  Holland.  Still  later  he  sought  his 
fortunes  in  Australia,  where  he  estab- 
lished himself  as  a  successful  watch- 
maker and  jeweler,  and  acquired  con- 
siderable wealth.  Later,  while  so- 
journing   in    England,    he    became    a 


convert  to  "Mormonism"  and  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  1,  1864,  by  Elisha  H. 
Groves.  In  1866-1868,  after  being  or- 
dained an  Elder,  he  filled  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand.  Later  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Joseph  Young,  and  on 
May  1,  1897,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Thomas  Duce.  In  1865  he 
located  in  Salt  Lake  City  where  he 
carried  on  a  successful  watchmaking 
and  jewelry  business  on  Main  Street. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1879-1880,  during  which  he  presided 
over  the  Copenhagen  Conference. 
In  1886,  while  residing  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  he  changed  his  name  from  As- 
mussen to  Amussen.  Investing  in  real 
estate  in  Logan,  Utah,  in  1890,  he 
located  there  with  his  family  where 
he  resided  until  the  time  of  his  death 
which  occurred  at  Logan  Oct.  29,  1902. 
Elder  Asmussen  married  three  wives 


84 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


by  whom  he  raised  a  large  family  of 
children.  His  first  wife  was  Anna  Ka- 
trine Nielsen,  a  native  of  Saeby,  Den- 
mark; his  second  wife  was  Martha  M. 
Smith,  who  was  married  to  him  Nov. 
6,  1884,  and  his  third  wife  was  Barbara 
M.  Smith,  whom  he  married  Oct.  4, 
1885. 

Elder  Asmussen  was  a  successful 
business  man,  and  at  the  time  of  his 
demise  was  the  owner  of  several  busi- 
ness blocks  in  Logan  and  consider- 
able property,  also,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  was  a  man  of  few  words,  but  every 
move  he  made  of  a  practical  nature 
was  carefully  considered  and  planned; 
hence  the  success  of  his  life.  Ever 
since  he  became  a  convert  to  the  re- 
stored gospel,  he  gave  his  first  alle- 
giance to  the  Lord,  his  Church  and  his 
people  and  became  known  by  his  liber- 
ality and  self  sacrifice  on  many  oc- 
casions. Among  those  with  whom  he 
became  well  acquainted  he  gained  a 
reputation  as  an  honest  and  reliable 
man  who  could  be  trusted  under  all 
circumstances  to  do  that  which  was 
right.  Both  at  home  and  abroad  he 
gained  many  friends  and  had  the  con- 
fidence and  good  will  of  his  associates. 
Most  of  his  children  are  faithful  mem- 
bers of  the  Church  to  which  he  gave 
his  allegiance  and  among  people  of  his 
own  nationality  he  was  widely  known 
and  respected. 

BORGESON,  Anders  (Andrew),  an 

active  Elder  in  the  Church,  was  born 
June  20,  1832,  In  Dahlsland,  Bralanda 
socken  (parish),  Elfsborg  Ian,  Sweden, 
the  son  of  Borge  Pehrson  and  his  wife 
Maria  Jansson.  He  was  one  of  a  fam- 
ily of  five  children,  his  brothers  and 
sisters  being  Joseph,  Anna  Katrine, 
Martha  Kaisa  and  Britta  Maria.  His 
father  died  when  he  was  about  three 
years  old  and  his  mother  passed  away 
about  five  years  later.  This  caused 
the  family  to  be  scattered  among  rela- 
tives and  friends,  and  his  uncle  (his 
mother's  brother)  took  charge  of  the 
estate  and  little  Anders  lived  in  his 


family.  During  his  boyhood  days  he 
suffered  many  hardships,  being  com- 
pelled to  herd  sheep  in  the  fields  until 
late  fall  and  again  in  early  spring, 
barefooted.  While  in  the  fields  in  this 
capacity  he  often  earned  a  few  pennies 
by  opening  and  closing  gates  as  mem- 
bers of  the  nobility  crossed  the  estate 
in  carriages.  Later,  he  was  employed 
as  a  sailor  on  a  cargo  ship  on  Lake 
Vennern. 

In   1857,  Anders  Borgeson  married 
Maria  Olsson.     They  were  both  mem- 


bers of  the  Lutheran  Church  but  be- 
coming converts  to  the  restored  gospel 
they  were  baptized  Aug.  13,  1860,  by 
Sven  Rosengren.  From  the  date  of 
his  baptism,  Bro.  Borgeson  was  a 
faithful  and  energetic  worker  in  the 
Church,  first  as  a  local  missionary  and 
later  as  president  of  the  Rastock 
Branch  of  the  Goteborg  Conference  in 
Sweden.  Being  an  ardent  missionary 
he  baptized  a  number  of  converts, 
which  alarmed  the  local  sectarian  min- 
isters, who,  in  1862,  succeeded  in  get- 
ting him  imprisoned  for  preaching. 
He  served  a  term  of  28  days  in  the 
Vennersborg  prison  on  a  bread  and 
water  diet.  Here  he  was  denied  the 
usual  privilege  of  being  given  regular 
prison  fare   every  fifth  day  and   the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


85 


Saints  feared  for  his  health — ^but  he 
was  none  the  worse  for  his  experience. 
Shortly  afterwards  he  and  his  wife 
left  Sweden  with  a  company  of  L.  D.  S. 
emigrants  bound  for  Utah.  Crossing 
the  North  Sea  in  a  steamer  they 
proceeded  by  rail  to  Liverpool,  Eng- 
land, where  they  boarded  the  good 
ship  "B.  S.  Kimball"  for  New  York, 
where  they  arrived  June  15,  1863; 
they  crossed  the  plains  and  mountains 
in  Capt.  John  F.  Sanders'  ox  train, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept. 
5,  1863.  Locating  for  a  time  in  Provo, 
Utah  County,  Utah,  Bro.  Borgeson 
learned  to  make  molasses.  In  January, 
1864,  he  and  wife  moved  to  Santa- 
quin,  also  in  Utah  County,  v/here  he 
secured  some  farming  land,  built  a 
house  and  constructed  a  ditch  over 
half  a  mile  in  length  to  bring  water 
to  his  property.  He  also  constructed 
a  road  to  one  of  the  canyons,  in  order 
to  procure  timber  and  wood;  this  can- 
yon is  still  known  as  Borgeson  Can- 
yon. Bro.  Borgeson  built  and  operated 
the  first  molasses  mill  in  Santaquin 
and  constructed  one  of  the  first  hand- 
looms  in  that  locality;  he  also  made 
adobies  and  farmed  quite  successfully. 

Being  active  in  the  Church,  Bro. 
Borgeson  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Feb.  27,  1887,  by  Roger  Openshaw 
and  a  High  Priest,  Dec.  11,  1889,  by 
David  John.  For  several  years  he 
acted  as  second  counselor  in  the  Scan- 
dinavian organization  at  Santaquin 
and  served  in  the  Black  Hawk  Indian 
war.  He  also  acted  for  a  long  time 
as  head  water-master  for  the  Summit 
Creek   Irrigation  Company. 

Sister  Maria  Borgeson  died  in  1872 
and  on  April  14,  1873,  Bro.  Borgeson 
married  Nicoline  Olsen,  a  recently  ar- 
rived convert  from  Norway,  the  cere- 
mony being  performed  in  the  Endow- 
ment House  in  Salt  Lake  City.  Eleven 
children  were  born  to  them  in  a  home 
where  the  principles  of  the  gospel 
were  taught  and  practiced.  Bro. 
Borgeson  died  at  Santaquin  March  21, 


1902,  loved  and  respected  by  all  who 
knew  him. 

BRINTON,  David,  3rd  Bishop  of  Big 
Cottonwood,  Salt  Lake  County,  Utah, 
was  born  Dec.  29,  1814,  at  Dillworth, 
Delaware  Co.,  Pa.,  the  son  of  John 
Brinton  and  Priscilla  Branson.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  he 
was  baptized  by  Lorenzo  D.  Barnes, 
June  12,  1840,  and  emigrated  to  Nau- 
voo.  111.,  where  he  arrived  July  1,  1841. 
In  1842-43  he  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Brigham  Young  and  when  he 
afterwards  was  oi'dained  a  Seventy  he 
became  identified  with  the  9th  Quorum 
of  Seventy.  He  married  Elizabeth  G. 
Hoops,  Feb.  22,  1844,  who  bore  him  a 
son  (Robert  H.)  who  was  born  Nov.  11, 
1845,  and  died  Oct.  10,  1846,  at  Winter 
Quarters.  Here  also  his  wife  died 
Sept.  27,  1846. 

In  the  spring  of  1844,  Bro.  Brinton 
left  Nauvoo  on  a  mission,  returning 
about  a  year  later.  In  the  spring  of 
1846  he  left  Nauvoo,  together  with 
the  rest  of  his  co-religionists  as  an 
exile,  and  the  following  winter  he 
spent  at  Winter  Quarters  on  the  Mis- 
souri river,  suffering  considerably  with 
the  fever  and  ague.  In  June,  1847,  he 
removed  with  his  family  to  Savannah, 
Mo.,  he  having  married  Harriet  W. 
Dilworth  at  Winter  Quarters,  Jan.  14, 
1848.  In  1850  he  left  Savannah  for 
G.  S.  L.  Valley  where  he  arrived  Sept. 
17,  1850.  In  December  following  he 
accompanied  George  A.  Smith  to 
Southern  Utah  and  became  one  of  the 
first  settlers  of  Parowan,  Iron  County. 
Returning  to  the  north  in  June,  1851, 
he  bought  a  farm  on  Big  Cottonwood, 
but  was  sent  to  the  Green  River  coun- 
try in  1854,  where  he  assisted  in  the 
founding  of  Fort  Supply.  In  1856 
(Nov.  15th)  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Big 
Cottonwood  Ward,  succeeding  Ezekiel 
Lee.  In  1857  he  married  Mary  Hill- 
house  as  a  plural  wife.  (She  after- 
wards apostatized  and  went  to  the 
States).    At  the  general  conference  of 


86 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


the  Church  held  in  April,  1857,  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  United 
States.  Leaving  G.  S.  L.  City  April 
23,  1857,  he  crossed  the  plains  with 
handcarts  in  company  with  other 
Elders  destined  for  Europe,  Canada 
and  the  United  States.  When  he  re- 
turned to  the  Valley  in  1858  he  found 
that  nearly  all  the  Saints  had  moved 
south,  owing  to  the  approach  of  the 
U.  S.  army  under  General  Johnston. 
He  found  his  family  temporarily  lo- 
cated in  Lehi,  Utah  County,  in  good 
health,  June  22,  1858,  but  otherwise 
in  a  destitute  condition.  When  the 
Saints  returned  north  from  their  tem- 
porary exodus  in  the  south,  Bishop 
Brinton  moved  back  to  his  Cottonwood 
home,  where  he  resumed  his  duties  as 
Bishop  and  held  that  position  until 
1877,  when  he  was  honorably  released. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  Europe  in  1870- 
1872.  By  his  wife  Harriet  W.  Dil- 
worth,  Bishop  Brinton  had  nine  chil- 
dren, namely,  Caleb  Dilworth  Brinton, 
born  Nov.  21,  1848,  in  Savanah,  Mo.; 
David  Branson  Brinton,  born  Feb. 
23,  1850,  in  Savanah,  Mo.;  Joseph 
Hammond  Brinton,  born  April  8, 
1852,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah; 
Samuel  Brinton,  born  Dec.  26,  1853, 
in  Big  Cottonwood,  Utah;  William 
Henry  Brinton,  born  Oct.  19,  1855,  in 
Big  Cottonwood,  and  died  Sept.  14, 
1857,  about  two  years  old;  Franklin 
D.  and  Harriet  D.  Brinton,  (twins) 
born  Nov.  21,  1857,  in  Big  Cottonwood; 
Sarah  Elizabeth  Brinton,  born  March 
8,  1861,  in  Big  Cottonwood;  and  Eliza 
Brinton,  born  March  30,  1863,  in  Big 
Cottonwood. 

Bishop  Brinton  married  Olive  Lewis 
Oct.  14,  1865,  and  Hilda  Matilda 
Bredesen,  Oct.  19,  1867;  the  latter 
bore  him  4  children,  namely,  Hiram 
B.,  born  April  23,  1870;  Margerie,  born 
July  6,  1873;  Wm.  Rowe,  born  April  7, 
1875;  and  Robert  Neslen,  born  May 
26,  1877,  all  in  Big  Cottonwood.  He 
had  no  children  by  Olive  Lewis  or 
Mary  Hillhouse. 


Bishop  Brinton  died  at  his  home  in 
Big  Cottonwood,  May  17,  1878. 

CANNON,  Martha  Hughes,  one  of 

the  first  Utah  women  to  receive  the 
degree  of  M.  D.,  was  born  July  1,  1857, 
at  Great  Ormes  Head,  near  Llandudno, 
Wales,  the  daughter  of  Peter  Hughes 
and  Elizabeth  Evans.  Her  parents  be- 
coming converts  to  the  restored  gospel 
through  the  preaching  of  L.  D.  S. 
missionaries,  the  family  emigrated  to 


Dr.   M.   H.   Cannon   and  daufhtor  Gwendolyn. 

America  in  1858.  For  two  years  they 
remained  in  New  York  City,  on  ac- 
count of  the  father's  poor  health,  but 
were  then  advised  by  Apostle  Ei-astus 
Snow  to  go  on  to  Florence,  Nebraska, 
whence,  in  1860,  they  crossed  the 
plains  and  mountains  in  a  covered 
wagon,  the  mother  walking  most  of 
the  way,  in  order  that  her  invalid 
husband  and  five  little  daughters  might 
ride.  Annie,  the  youngest,  fifteen 
months  old,  died  while  on  the  journey 
and  was  buried  on  the  roadside,  and 
three  days  after  the  family  arrived  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  City,  the  father,  Peter 
Hughes,  breathed  his  last. 

A    year    later    the    widow    married 
James  P.   Paul,  a  widower  with  four 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


87 


children,  who,  being  a  carpenter,  con- 
structed a  home  for  them,  which  is  still 
standing  near  the  corner  of  9th  East 
and  5th  South  streets,  Salt  Lake  City, 
a  rare  example  of  sun-dried  adobe 
architecture. 

Martha  (or  Mattie  as  she  was  famil- 
iarly known)  early  showed  unusual 
intelligence  and  strong  individuality. 
At  the  age  of  14  she  taught  school, 
at  15  she  was  a  typesetter,  and  then, 
for  five  years,  worked  as  a  printer  on 
the  "Deseret  News"  and  "Woman's 
Exponent."  Having  aspired  to  become 
a  physician,  she  carefully  saved  her 
money  to  go  East  and  study  medicine. 
In  1878  she  went  to  Ann  Arbor  and 
entered  the  Medical  Department  of  the 
University  of  Michigan,  working  her 
way  through  college  by  washing  dishes 
and  making  beds  at  a  student's  board- 
ing house.  Later,  she  tutored  and  did 
secretarial  work  to  help  pay  her  col- 
lege expenses.  She  graduated  in  1880 
with  the  degi-ee  of  M.  D.,  after  having 
taken,  in  addition  to  the  prescribed 
courses,  optional  courses  in  electro- 
theropeutics  and  bacteriology.  After 
her  graduation  she  practiced  medicine 
at  Algonac,  Mich.,  her  patients  coming 
from  both  the  Canadian  and  the 
American  side  of  the  St.  Clair  River. 
Her  first  case  was  the  insane  wife  of 
a  river  captain.  The  young  doctor 
discovered  and  cured  the  underlying 
cause  of  the  malady  and  the  woman 
recovered  her  health  and  reason. 

In  the  fall  of  1881  Dr.  Cannon  went 
to  Philadelphia,  where  she  entered  the 
auxiliary  medical  department  of  the 
University  of  Pennsylvania,  taking 
special  post-graduate  training,  and  she 
also  studied  public  speaking  at  the 
National  School  of  Elocution  and  Ora- 
tory. This  was  in  order  that  she 
might  follow  out  her  conviction  that 
community  health  could  be  improved 
by  popular  lectures;  she  also  studied 
pharmacy  at  night.  In  1882  she  gradu- 
ated from  the  University  of  Pennsyl- 
vania with  the  degree  of  Batchelor  of 
Science  and  also  received  a  bachelor's 


degree  from  the  National  School  of 
Oratory.  She  then  returned  to  Utah 
and  as  a  result  of  overwork  had  brain 
fever.  After  her  recovery  she  be- 
came resident  physician  of  the  Deseret 
Hospital  in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  position 
which  she  held  for  three  years. 

On  Oct.  6,  1884,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
she  became  the  wife  of  Angus  M. 
Cannon,  pi-esident  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion,  but  was  still  able  to 
prosecute  her  medical  studies  in  order 
to  render  more  efficient  service  to 
her  people,  she  being  at  all  times  a 
devoted  Latter-day  Saint. 

In  1885,  Dr.  Cannon  visited  the  Cot- 
ton Exposition  at  New  Orleans  and 
also  inspected  the  training  schools  for 
nurses  in  New  York  City  and  Boston 
with  a  view  of  opening  similar  schools 
in  the  far  west.  In  1886  she  visited 
leading  hospitals  in  France,  Switzer- 
land and  England,  and  upon  her  re- 
turn to  Salt  Lake  City  established  the 
first  training  school  for  nurses  in 
Utah.  In  addition,  she  gave  lectures 
on  obstetrics,  a  subject  of  vital  interest 
to  pioneer  communities,  where  medical 
aid  was  not  at  all  times  immediately 
available. 

In  1890,  Dr.  Cannon  took  her  chil- 
dren and  went  into  voluntary  exile  in 
San  Francisco,  in  order  that  her  hus- 
band might  remain  free  to  prosecute 
his  various  enterprises.  Returning 
later  to  Salt  Lake  City  she  established 
an  office  on  the  corner  of  South  Tem- 
ple and  State  streets  and  practiced  as 
a  physician  for  some  time  with  marked 
success. 

Being  an  ai'dent  advocate  of  wom- 
en's rights.  Dr.  Cannon  belonged  to 
the  younger  group  who  worked  in  con- 
nection with  the  noted  suffragist  lead- 
ers, Susan  B.  Anthony  and  Anna  Shaw, 
and  in  behalf  of  votes  for  women  Dr. 
Cannon  addressed  gatherings  in  Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  and  at  the  World's  Co- 
lumbian Exposition  in  Chicago  in  the 
nineties.  While  in  the  national  capi- 
tal, by  request,  she  appeared  before 
a    Congressional    Committee    to    give 


88 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


a  synopsis  of  the  political  work  done 
by  women  in  Utah. 

In  1896  she  was  elected  to  the  State 
senate  of  Utah,  being  the  first  woman 
in  the  United  States  to  hold  the  office 
of  state  senator.  While  holding  this 
position  she  introduced  a  number  of 
important  bills,  which  later  were  in- 
corporated in  the  government  of  the 
state,  among  them  being  a  bill  for  the 
establishment  of  a  State  Board  of 
Health,  a  Pure  Food  Law,  a  bill  com- 
pelling merchants  to  provide  seats  for 
their  sales  ladies  and  another  bill  for 
the  establishment  of  a  hospital  ward 
for  the  State  School  for  the  Deaf, 
Dumb  and  Blind.  She  later  became  a 
member  of  the  State  Board  of  Health, 
the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Deaf  and 
Dumb  Institute  and  vice-president  of 
the  American  Congress  of  Tubercu- 
losis. 

During  the  last  12  years  of  her  life 
Dr.  Cannon  resided  in  Los  Angeles, 
California,  where  she  worked  in  the 
Graves'  Clinic,  in  the  orthopedic  dept. 
of  the  general  hospital.  She  was  an  au- 
thority on  narcotic  addiction,  of  which 
subject  she  had  made  a  special  study. 
She  died  in  Los  Angeles,  July  10,  1932, 
aged  75  years;  interment  took  place 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  She  was  sur- 
vived by  one  son,  James  H.  Cannon, 
president  of  the  Cannon  Electric 
Development  Company  of  California, 
and  a  daughter,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Can- 
non Porter,  a  writer,  widow  of  the 
late  Roy  S.  Porter.  A  younger  daugh- 
ter, Mrs.  Gwendolyn  Cannon  Quick, 
artist  and  musician,  died  in  1928,  aged 
29  years. 

CHILD,  George  Newport,  member 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
Board,  was  born  Feb.  11,  1867,  at 
Clover,  Tooele  County,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  Child  and  Elizabeth  de  St. 
Jeor.  By  the  marriage  of  his  parents 
was  brought  about  the  union  of  two 
families  whose  history  shows  the  em- 
bodiment of  the  finest  ideals  both  of 
the  French  and  the   English  peoples. 


Bro.  Child  was  therefore  one  of  those 
fortunate  persons  whose  education  be- 
gan as  far  back  as  the  birth  of  his 
grandparents.  The  Child  family  moved 
from  Tooele  to  Utah  County  when 
George  was  six  years  old.  Here  he 
was  baptized  June  1,  1877,  by  Jacob 
Bushman  and  lived  in  Lehi  until  he 
had  reached  the  age  of  40.  Here  also 
he  received  his  early  training  in  the 
Priesthood.  Bro.  Child  passed  through 
all  the  experiences  of  pioneer  life  in 


Lehi,  and  his  early  education  also  was 
of  the  pioneer  order,  but  he  made  the 
most  of  his  opportunity  and  became 
a  great  student.  After  attending  the 
Brigham  Young  Academy  at  Provo,  he 
chose  teaching  as  his  life's  work,  in 
which  he  was  eminently  successful. 
After  years  of  teaching  and  supervis- 
ing schools,  during  which  he  rose  to 
the  highest  teaching  and  supervising 
positions  in  his  home  county,  being 
county  superintendent  of  schools  a 
number  of  years,  but  obtained  but 
meagre  monetary  remuneration,  he 
entered  into  banking  in  which  he 
measured  up  to  every  requirement 
made  of  him.  But  the  lure  of  teach- 
ing drew  him  back  to  the  field  in  which 
he  was  happiest  and  in  which  he  was 
destined  to  reach  the  greatest  heights 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


89 


obtainable  in  his  state.  In  1910-1911 
he  was  chosen  to  fill  the  position  of 
supervisor  of  grammar  grades  in  the 
schools  of  Salt  Lake  City.  In  this 
position  he  won  his  way  through 
difficulties.  But  he  not  only  became 
skilful  in  diagnosing  the  ills  and  weak- 
nesses of  a  school,  but  just  as  expert 
in  applying  the  needed  remedies,  and 
became  a  master  supervisor  of  instruc- 
tion. In  1919  he  was  appointed  by 
Gov.  Bamberger,  State  Superintendent 
of  Public  Instruction,  which  position 
he  held  for  one  year.  In  1920  he  was 
chosen  as  City  Superintendent  of 
schools  and  filled  the  same  with  signal 
success  until  the  day  of  his  death. 
The  record  of  George  N.  Child  as 
superintendent  of  Salt  Lake  City 
schools  is  the  crowning  accomplish- 
ment of  his  life. 

In  a  Church  capacity  Bro.  Child  was 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices  of 
Priest,  Elder  and  High  Priest.  To  the 
latter  office  he  was  ordained  by  Heber 
J.  Grant  and  set  apart  as  Stake  Presi- 
dent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  Alpine 
Stake.  He  moved  to  Salt  Lake  City 
in  1911,  and  was  chosen  as  a  member 
of  the  General  Sunday  School  Board 
of  the  Church.  In  1891  (Sept.  23) 
he  married  Florence  Willis,  who  was 
born  July  23,  1871,  and  died  Nov.  29, 
1905.  Six  children  blessed  this  mar- 
riage, namely,  George  P.,  Junius  S., 
Florence  A.,  Mildred  E.,  Margaret  A., 
and  Edith.  In  1908  (June  3rd)  Bro. 
Child  married  Julia  Alleman,  daughter 
of  Benjamin  Alleman  and  Sariah  J. 
Starr.  This  union  resulted  in  three 
children,  namely,  Julia,  John  A.  and 
Richard  H. 

Elder  Child  received  a  college  educa- 
tion at  the  B.  Y.  Univei'sity  at  Provo, 
graduating  from  the  normal  depart- 
ment and  after  that  attended  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  and  graduated  with 
the  degree  of  A.  B. 
He  died  July  9,  1932. 

CHRISTENSEN,  Olive  Derbidge,  a 
former  member  of  the  General  Board 


of  Relief  Society,  was  born  Oct.  10, 
1870,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  Joseph  Derbidge  and  Jane 
Cook.  She  was  baptized  by  her  father 
Oct.  10,  1878.  In  her  earliest  youth 
she  began  taking  an  active  part  in  the 
organizations  of  the  Church.  She 
held  the  position  of  secretary  of  the 
Primary  Association  of  the  Nineteenth 
Ward,  and  later  became  president  of 
the  same.  She  was  afterwards  chosen 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 


same  ward,  and  served  on  the  Stake 
Sunday  School  Board.  From  1896  to 
1911  she  served  on  the  General  Board 
of  the  Primary  Association,  as  assist- 
ant secretary  and  secretary,  and  while 
holding  these  positions  she  assisted  in 
the  editorial  department  of  the  "Chil- 
dren's Friend."  On  May  25,  1911,  she 
was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  the  Relief  Society,  acting 
as  secretary,  holding  that  position  un- 
til July  3,  1913,  when  she  was  released 
on  account  of  ill  health.  She  was 
afterwards  a  member  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  Relief  Society  Board  for  a  few 
years.  On  Dec.  3,  1903,  she  became 
the  wife  of  Andrew  Hyrum  Christen- 
sen,  the  son  of  Herman  J.  Christensen 
and  Annie  Catharine  Poulsen.  Her 
husband  was  born   May  18,   1863,  at 


90 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Gunnison,  Utah.  He  was  connected 
with  the  Utah  Construction  Company, 
being  one  of  the  founders  of  the  same. 
He  was  vice-president  of  the  company 
at  the  time  of  his  demise,  Sept.  22, 
1931.  Two  children  were  born  to 
Brother  and  Sister  Christensen,  name- 
ly, Andrew  Lee,  born  Oct.  9,  1904,  and 
Allen  Derbidge,  born  May  30,  1907. 

COON,  Isaac  William,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Oquirrh 
Stake  of  Zion,  was  born  Aug.  11,  1869, 


at  Gi-antsville,  Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  Coon  and  Mary  Tabitha 
York.  As  an  infant,  he  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
the  family  resided  until  Isaac  was 
nine  years  old.  The  family  then  re- 
moved to  Santaquin,  Utah  County, 
where  they  lived  two  years  and  then 
settled  permanently  in  Pleasant  Green, 
Salt  Lake  Co.  With  the  exception  of 
two  years  spent  in  Huntsville,  Weber 
County,  Isaac  has  resided  in  Pleasant 
Green  ever  since.  He  was  baptized 
by  John  Cottam  when  eight  years  old, 
and,  taking  an  active  part  in  Church 
affairs  from  his  early  youth,  he  acted 
successively  as  a  Deacon,  Teacher,  and 
Priest.  After  being  ordained  an  Elder 
in  January,  1896,  by  Walter  Bi'own,  he 
acted  as  second  counselor  to  Thomas 


Turner,  president  of  an  Elders'  Quo- 
rum in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake;  later  he 
presided  over  the  10th  Quorum  of 
Elders  in  the  Pioneer  Stake  until  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  May  14,  1916, 
by  Seymour  B.  Young.  He  acted  as 
president  of  the  92nd  Quorum  of  Sev- 
enty about  two  years.  On  Nov.  25, 
1919,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  by  Charles  W.  Penrose 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Pleasant  Green  Ward,  succeeding 
Bishop  George  A.  Little.  He  held  that 
position  until  June  3,  1923,  when  he 
was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Oquirrh  Stake,  which 
position  he  held  until  Feb.  3,  1929, 
when  he  was  chosen  as  second  counse- 
lor to  Harry  Edward  Sutton,  president 
of  the  Oquirrh  Stake,  which  position 
he  still  occupies.  Prior  to  being  chosen 
as  Bishop  he  acted  as  assistant  super- 
intendent of  the  Oquirrh  Sunday 
school  about  three  yeai's  and  later  as 
superintendent  of  that  school  for  eight 
years.  After  that  he  was  chosen  as 
first  assistant  superintendent  of  the 
Pleasant  Green  Sunday  school  and 
later  as  superintendent  of  said  school, 
which  position  he  held  until  he  was 
chosen  Bishop  of  the  Pleasant  Green 
Ward.  For  twenty-four  years  he  was 
a  member  of  the  Social  Committee  of 
the  Pleasant  Green  Ward,  acting  as 
chairman  of  said  committee  ten  years. 
In  1896  (Jan.  15th)  he  married  Mary 
Elva  Bei-tcch,  daughter  of  James  Ber- 
toch  and  Ann  Cutliff.  This  marriage 
was  blessed  with  five  children,  namely, 
Elva  Marie,  Isaac  Warren,  Vivian 
Bertoch,  Stanley  James,  and  Lilian. 
His  wife  died  Sept.  5,  1905,  and  on 
June  9,  1915,  he  married  Eliza  A. 
Perkins,  a  widow,  who  has  borne  him 
four  children,  namely,  Geoi'ge  William, 
John  Glen,  Owen  Frederick  and  Lyle 
Isabelle.  Elder  Coon  is  a  man  of 
affairs,  who,  besides  filling  so  many 
ecclesiastical  positions,  has  taken  an 
active  part  in  civil  affaii's  and  every- 
thing pertaining  to  the  welfare  of  the 
community  in  which  he  has  resided. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


91 


DUNFORD,   Grover  Cleveland,   4th 

Bishop  of  the  Huntington  Park  Ward, 
Los  Angeles  Stake,  Calif.,  was  born 
Oct.  10,  1888,  at  Bloomington,  Bear 
Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Albert 
Bailey  Dunford,  and  Mary  Nelson.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  10,  1896,  by  George 
H.  Thornick,  ordained  a  Deacon  in 
1901,  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  20,  1913, 
by  Serge  Ballif,  served  in  Huntington 
Park  Ward  (California)  Sunday 
School  Superintendency  for  two  years, 


was  chosen  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Jan.  4,  1931,  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Huntington  Park  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  occupies. 
Bishop  Dunford,  after  receiving  a 
common  school  education,  became  a 
student  in  the  Utah  Agricultural  Col- 
lege, from  which  he  graduated  in  1916. 
In  a  secular  capacity,  Bishop  Dunford 
has  served  as  vice-president  of  the 
Huntington  Park  Chamber  of  Com- 
merce, and  as  president  of  the  Oppor- 
tunity School  Board  from  1930  to  1931. 
He  was  also  chosen  as  a  member  of  a 
committee  of  three  to  organize  the 
Huntington  Park  Welfare  Council, 
served  as   a  director  of  the   Kiwanis 


Club  from  1928  to  1931,  director  of  the 
Southeast  District  Y.  M.  C.  A.,  director 
of  the  Southeast  Building  &  Loan 
Association  and  also  bank  director. 
Prior  to  coming  to  California  in  1925 
he  was  assistant  secretary  and  pur- 
chasing agent  of  the  University  of 
Utah  in  1916-1920,  and  is  now  the 
manager  and  owner  of  the  Inland 
Fertilizer  Company  in  California.  On 
June  30,  1915,  he  married  Mary  Alice 
Parkinson,  who  died  Feb.  6,  1920.  To 
this  union  was  born  one  son  (Grover 
Parkinson)  Aug.  26,  1925.  Bishop 
Dunford  married  Hazel  Irene  Weaver, 
who  had  one  son.  Jack,  by  a  former 
husband.  By  his  second  wife  Bishop 
Dunford  has  two  children,  namely, 
Theodore  Weaver  and  Mary  Lou. 
Bishop  Dunford  is  a  man  of  affairs, 
and  is  distinguished  for  his  excellent 
leadership,  both  ecclesiastically  and 
secularly. 

ELGGREN,  Albert  John,  10th  Bish- 
op of  the  Second  Ward,  Liberty  Stake, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  June 
29,    1876,    in    Malad,    Oneida    County, 


Idaho,  the  son  of  Adolph  Frederik  Elg- 
gren  and  Johanna  C.  Samuelson. 
When  two  years  old  he  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Salt  Lake  City  and  re- 


92 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


sided  first  in  the  16th  Ward.  Later 
he  resided  in  Hooper,  Weber  County, 
Utah,  where  he  was  raised  on  a  farm, 
but  when  his  father  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Sweden  in  1897,  the  family 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City,  in  order  to 
get  facilities  for  the  children  to  get 
High  School  and  University  training. 
Albert  attended  the  L.  D.  S.  University 
in  Salt  Lake  City  one  year,  and  after 
that  two  years  in  the  University  of 
Utah.  He  was  baptized  July  1,  1884, 
by  John  Cottam  and  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Teacher  and 
Priest.  Being  ordained  an  Elder 
Sept.  25,  1899,  by  Edwin  F.  Parry,  he 
presided  over  the  4th  quorum  of 
Elders  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  and 
later  as  president  of  the  2nd  quorum 
of  Elders  in  the  Liberty  Stake;  he  also 
served  as  an  officer  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  L 
A.,  and  secretary  of  the  Hooper  Ward 
Sunday  School.  In  July,  1901,  he  be- 
came a  resident  of  the  Second  Ward 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  having  married 
Vilate  Elizabeth  Lewis  of  Richmond, 
Utah,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  June 
5,  1901.  The  issue  of  this  marriage 
are  the  following  children:  Albert 
Lewis,  Carl  Adolph,  Martha,  Mary  El- 
nora,  John  Elmer,  Charles  Allen,  Wil- 
liam Harold,  Ralph  Waldo,  Richard 
Norman,  Raymond  Wallace  and  Joseph 
Earl.  Brother  Elggren  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Bryant  S.  Hinckley, 
Jan.  28,  1912,  and  acted  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Heber  C.  Iverson 
and  later  as  2nd  counselor  to  Bishop 
Henry  B.  Elder.  Still  later  he  acted 
as  1st  counselor  to  Bishop  Elder.  On 
Sept.  25,  1921,  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Second  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  which 
position  he  held  until  1935,  when  he 
was  honorably  released  and  chosen  as 
a  member  of  the  Liberty  Stake  High 
Council,  being  set  apart  to  that  office 
Oct.  28,  1935. 

He   was   for   several   years   an  em- 
ployee  in   the   office   of   Dr.   John   R. 


Park,  Superintendent  of  Public  In- 
struction, and  later  he  was  employed 
in  E.  F.  Hanna's  Mercantile  and  Brok- 
erage business.  In  1896  he  started 
a  mercantile  brokerage  under  the 
name  of  Elggren  Bros,  and  Co.,  of 
which  he  was  the  manager  and  his 
brothers  Andrew  Fred  and  Lorenzo  E. 
as  partners.  The  firm  is  still  carrying 
on  a  successful  business  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  with  branch  offices  in  Denvei", 
Colorado,  and  Butte,  Montana. 

Bishop  Elggren  is  known  through- 
out the  country  as  a  successful  busi- 
ness man  and  has  been  an  active  mem- 
ber of  the  Salt  Lake  Chamber  of 
Commerce  for  several  years.  In  ec- 
clesiastical positions  he  has  labored 
with  fidelity  and  marked  efficiency. 

FELT,  Charles  Brigham,  member  of 
the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
Board,  was  born  Jan.  13,  1860,  in  Salt 


Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Nathaniel 
H.  and  Eliza  Ann  Preston.  Baptized 
by  Albert  M.  Davis,  and  ordained  con- 
secutively. Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest, 
Elder,  Seventy  and  High  Priest. 
Filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  1880 
to  1882,  serving  as  clerk  of  the  mis- 
sion and  Emigration  Clerk  at  mission 
headquarters  in  Liverpool.     Active  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


93 


Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  as  president  of  the 
Association  for  several  years  in  the 
17th  Ward.  Served  as  a  president 
of  the  Third  Quorum  of  Seventy.  Con- 
ducted the  17th  Ward  Choir. 

It  was  the  Sunday  School  which 
claimed  his  life's  devotion.  In  1892 
he  was  appointed  superintendent  of 
the  17fh  Ward  Sunday  School  and  in- 
stituted the  monthly  officers  and 
teachers  meeting,  class  lesson  outlines 
and  other  innovations  in  Sunday  School 
work.  He  was  called  to  the  superin- 
tendency  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Sun- 
day School  Board  in  1901,  later  suc- 
ceeding Josiah  Burrows  as  superin- 
tendent. In  1906  he  was  made  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  Board,  actively  serving  in  this 
capacity  until  the  time  of  his  death. 

In  addition  to  his  oth.er  Church 
duties,  he  served  in  the  Bishopric  of 
Farmers  Ward  and  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  Granite  Stake. 
At  the  instance  of  the  Presiding 
Bishop's  office  he  wrote  a  manual  on 
"Ward  Teaching",  published  by  the 
Church. 

His  business  career  started  at  the 
age  of  13  as  a  telegraph  messenger 
boy.  Shortly  thereafter  he  joined  the 
Gilmer  &  Salisbury  Company,  operat- 
ing Stage  Coach  lines  in  Montana, 
Idaho  and  Wyoming,  and  was  connect- 
ed with  the  thrilling  experiences  inci- 
dent to  the  opening  up  of  the  West.  He 
was  cashier  of  the  Bank  of  Mercur 
when  that  mining  camp  was  at  its 
height.  In  1903  he  was  elected  city 
auditor  of  Salt  Lake  City,  serving 
during  1904-5.  After  the  dissolution 
of  the  Gilmer  &  Salisbury  Company, 
he  became  secretary  and  later  mana- 
ger of  the  Salisbury  Company,  operat- 
ing real  estate  and  mining  properties 
and  dealing  in  mortgage  loans,  etc. 
The  Felt  Building  was  erected  by  the 
Salisbury  Company,  and  named  in  his 
honor. 

In  1884  (June  4)  he  married 
Georgena  Spencer,  daughter  of  Daniel 


Spencer  and  Elizabeth  Funnell.  Nine 
children  were  born  to  them;  Elizabeth 
S.,  Naomi  S.,  Charles  Brent  (deceased) 
Spencer  P.,  Geoi-gina  S.,  Edwin  S., 
Margaret  S.,  Milton  S.,  and  Helen  S. 
Elder  Felt  was  gentle  and  kind  and 
beloved  by  all  who  knew  him.  He 
died  March  1,  1929. 

FETZER,  Casper  John,  1st  Bishop 
of  the  Jefferson  Ward,  Grant  Stake, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 
24,  1879,  in  Langenfeld,  Bavaria,  Ger- 


many, the  son  of  Peter  Fetzer  and 
Anna  Seifert.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
3,  1899,  by  J.  Percy  Goddard,  in  Mun- 
ich, Bavaria,  and  ordained  a  Deacon 
before  he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  April, 
1905.  After  locating  in  the  Cannon 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  he  was  ordained 
a  Teacher,  later  a  Priest,  and  still  later 
an  Elder  by  Gustaf  Koplin.  In  1906 
(May  21)  he  married  Bertha  Butler  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  The  children 
by  this  marriage  are:  Percy,  Leona, 
William,  Joseph  and  John.  Brother 
Fetzer  acted  for  several  years  as 
president  of  an  Elders  Quorum,  and 
also  as  president  of  the  German  meet- 
ings in  the  Pioneer  Stake  about  four- 
teen years.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty   and    later    a    High    Priest    and 


94 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


served  as  a  High  Councilor  in  the 
Pioneer  Stake,  also  taking  an  active 
part  in  scout  work,  and  in  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  work  of  the  Stake.  In  1923  he 
moved  to  Farmers  Ward,  where  he 
built  a  cabinet  fixture  factory  with 
an  office  on  Richards  Street,  Salt  Lake 
City.  When  the  Grant  Stake  of  Zion 
was  organized  in  July,  1924,  he  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil, which  position  he  held  until  the 
Jefferson  Ward  was  organized,  July  20, 
1924,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Apostle  Rudger  Clawson  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  that  Ward. 
Brother  Fetzer  has  been  active  in  secu- 
lar matters  and  now  acts  as  president 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Cabinet  and  Fixture 
Company,  which  company  he  founded 
in  1909.  He  had  learned  the  trade  of 
cabinet-maker  and  draftsman  in  the 
military  High  School  in  Bavaria,  and 
after  his  arrival  in  Utah  took  a  busi- 
ness course  in  the  L.  D.  S.  University 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  worked  for 
five  years  as  draughtsman  in  the  Ore- 
gon Short  Line  engineering  depart- 
ment. After  the  death  of  his  wife 
March  20,  1929,  Bishop  Fetzer  made 
a  trip  to  Europe,  where  he  spent  five 
months  visiting  Bavaria  and  other 
parts  of  Europe.  On  June  9,  1930,  he 
married  Martha  Seeberger  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple. 

FLINT,  William,  one  of  the  Utah 
pioneers  of  1848,  was  born  Jan.  28, 
1814,  in  Onandagua  County,  N.  Y., 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  in 
the  State  of  New  York  through  the 
labors  of  Orson  Hyde  and  located  in 
Nauvoo,  111.,  whence  he  came  west 
during  the  exodus  and  spent  two  win- 
ters at  Winter  Quarters.  In  crossing 
the  plains  in  1848  he  drove  a  team  for 
Mrs.  Mary  Fielding  Smith,  mother  of 
the  late  Pi-es.  Joseph  F.  Smith,  from 
Winter  Quarters  to  the  Three  Cross- 
ings of  the  Sweetwater.  From  there 
Bro.  Flint  was  sent  back  on  the  road  to 
assist  the  later  companies  of  that 
year's  Latter-day  Saint  emigration  to 


the  Valley.  After  his  arrival  in  Salt 
Lake  Valley  he  married  Mary  Jane 
Goodridge  in  1850,  she  having  crossed 
the  plains  that  year  in  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff's company.  Eight  children  were 
the  issue  of  this  marriage,  namely, 
Sarah  Jane,  Valeria  Ann,  William  L., 
Fedalia  (who  later  married  Henry 
Jacobs)  and  Harriet,  Abel,  George  and 
Sophia.  William  Flint  died  Sept.  21, 
1890,  in  Parley's  Canyon  (at  the  home 
of   his   daughter  Valeria),   near   Salt 


f- 


I        ^^•^ 


Lake  City,  Utah.  He  was  a  farmer  by 
avocation  and  died  as  a  faithful  Lat- 
ter-day Saint,  being  the  only  one  of 
his  father's  family  who  joined  the 
Church. 

FOWLER,  William,  author  of  the 
popular  Latter-day  Saint  hymn  "We 
Thank  Thee,  0  God,  for  a  Prophet", 
was  born  May  9,  1830,  in  Australia, 
the  son  of  John  Fowler  and  Bridget 
Niel.  His  father,  who  served  as  a 
soldier  in  the  British  Army,  was  trans- 
ferred from  Australia  to  India  when 
William  was  Sy^  years  old.  After 
five  years  service  in  East  India,  the 
father,  being  honorably  discharged 
from  military  service,  took  his  family 
to  England  and  located  in  Sheffield. 
There  his  father  died,  and  when  Wil- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


95 


liam  was  15  years  old  his  mother  also 
died.  His  mother  had  been  a  Roman 
Catholic  and  his  father  a  Protestant, 
but  they  both  joined  the  Wesleyan 
Church,  and  when  18  years  of  age  Wil- 
liam became  seriously  interested  in 
religion,  and  after  investigating  the 
doctrines  of  the  Methodists  and  other 
sects  with  unsatisfactory  results,  he 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism," 
being  baptized  July  29,  1849,  by  Elder 
J.  V.  Long.  Obtaining  a  strong  testi- 
mony of  the  truth  of  the  restored 
gospel,  he  was  ordained  a  Priest  March 
3,  1851,  by  Elder  Long.  Being  called 
to  labor  as  a  local  missionary,  he  serv- 
ed in  that  capacity  about  four  years, 
and  was  ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  21, 
1858,  by  Isaac  Abel.  He  married  Ellen 
Bradshaw  in  Sheffield,  and  three  chil- 
dren (Harriet,  Henry  Ammon  and 
Florence)  were  the  issue  of  this  mar- 
riage. Emigrating  to  America,  Bro. 
Fowler,  with  his  family  Tossed  the 
Atlantic  in  1863  on  the  sailing  ship 
"Amazon,"  and  landed  in  New  York, 
July  25,  1863.  Continuing  the  journey 
by  rail  and  rivers,  they  I'eached  Flor- 
ence, Nebraska;  thence  they  com- 
menced the  journey  across  the  plains 
in  Daniel  D.  McArthur's  Company, 
which  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Oct. 
3,  1863.  The  family  located  in  Manti, 
where  Bro.  Fowler  taught  school  in 
his  own  home.  He  died  in  Manti  in 
August,  1865,  and  later  the  Church 
erected  a  monument  in  the  Manti 
cemetery  in  his  honor  as  author  of  the 
hymn,  "We  Thank  Thee,  0  God,  for 
a  Prophet." 

FRANCIS,  Maria  Banks,  a  faithful 
Latter-day  Saint  and  worker  in  the 
ReHef  Society,  was  born  Feb.  25,  1838, 
in  London,  England,  the  oldest  daugh- 
ter of  William  Banks  and  Maria  Lamp- 
rell.  Her  mother,  a  very  accomplished 
woman,  conducted  a  school  for  girls 
and  here  Sister  Francis  received  an 
excellent  education.  Mr.  Banks,  a 
buyer  for  a  dry  goods  firm  in  London, 
was  a  personal  friend  of  Mr.  Williams, 


founder  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian 
Association,  and  some  of  the  first 
meetings  of  that  organization  were 
held  in  Mrs.  Banks'  school  rooms  and 
Sister  Francis  remembered  as  a  child 
singing  for  Mr.  Williams  and  his 
young  men. 

When  18  years  of  age,  Sister  Francis 
took  a  voyage  with  her  uncle,  Captain 
Johnson  Lamprell,  and  his  wife,  on 
the  ship  "Castle  Howard,"  intending 
to  visit  India   and  China  and  return 


with  them.  But  when  the  ship  ar- 
rived in  Calcutta,  Maria  begged  to  stay 
with  friends  there  until  her  uncle 
should  return.  The  ship,  however, 
was  lost  in  the  China  Sea  and  on  June 
9,  1866,  she  married  Dr.  Robert  Fran- 
cis of  Allahabad,  a  native  of  Newtown, 
Wales.  But  her  happiness  was  short- 
lived, for  Dr.  Francis  died  of  sunstroke 
July  14,  1868,  leaving  her  with  an  in- 
fant daughter;  another  daughter  was 
born  six  months  afterwards.  Sister 
Francis  then  returned  to  her  parents 
in  London,  taking  with  her  the  babies 
and  a  native  "ayer".  A  year  later  she 
and  her  native  maid  went  back  to 
India,  leaving  the  children  with  their 
grandparents.  In  Allahabad,  in  con- 
nection with  another  lady,  Sister  Fran- 
cis opened  a  store  for  ladies'  furnish- 
ings, in  which  venture  she  was  very 


96 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


successful.  In  1877  she  returned  to 
England  and  engaged  in  business,  with 
success.  She  devoted  herself  to  the 
education  of  her  two  daughters,  giv- 
ing them  every  advantage  in  her  pow- 
er and  sending  them  to  France  for 
two  years  after  they  had  completed 
their  training  in  a  ladies'  college. 

In  1892  Sister  Francis  attended  a 
meeting  of  the  Ethical  Society  in  South 
Place,  London,  when  Elder  James  H. 
Anderson  delivered  a  splendid  lecture 
on  "Mormonism".  Being  much  im- 
pressed, she  sought  further  light  upon 
the  subject  and  was  baptized  Feb.  19, 
1893,  by  Bishop  T.  A.  Clawson  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  then  president  of  the  Lon- 
don Conference;  her  daughter  Mary 
was  baptized  soon  afterwards.  Sister 
Francis'  parents  died,  both  in  one 
week,  in  1893,  and  her  daughter  Alice, 
having  embraced  the  Catholic  faith 
and  entered  a  convent.  Sister  Francis 
and  her  daughter  Mary  emigrated  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  in  1894,  and 
later  in  the  same  year  the  daughter 
was  married  to  Elder  Willard  John 
Kelly,  who,  however,  died  early  the 
next  year.  Sister  Francis  then  became 
manager  of  the  Women's  Co-op  Store 
from  which  she  retired  in  1902.  Dur- 
ing this  time  she  was  an  active  mem- 
ber of  the  Utah  Women's  Press  Club, 
of  which  she  later  became  president. 
She  also  gave  illustrated  lectures  on 
life  in  India.  After  her  retirement 
from  business  she  devoted  herself  to 
Church  work  and  made  two  converts 
while  acting  as  a  Relief  Society  teach- 
er. Being  a  brilliant  pianist  she  played 
for  the  radio  when  she  was  86  years 
of  age.  She  died  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
May  15,  1925,  being  survived  by  her 
two  daughters  and  a  grandson,  John 
Kelly  Pye.  Her  widowed  daughter 
had,  in  1907  become  the  wife  of  Elder 
Caleb  E.  Pye,  of  Salt  Lake  City,  the 
younger  remained  in  the  convent  in 
France. 

GOATES,  Herman  Calvin,  Clerk  of 
the    Lehi    Stake    of    Zion,    was    born 


March  18,  1894,  at  Lehi,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Joseph  W.  Goates  and  Emma  Jane 
Losee. 

Being  instructed  by  his  parents  in 
the  principles  of  the  gospel,  the  boy 
was  baptized  June  17,  1902,  by  Lot  A. 
Russon.  After  being  ordained  a  Dea- 
con March  12,  1904,  a  Teacher  Dec.  13, 
1907,  and  a  Priest  Dec.  11,  1911,  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  22,  1914, 
by  Joseph  W.  Goates.  On  Nov.  11, 1919, 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  J.  Gold- 


en Kimball  and  set  apart  the  same 
day  as  a  missionary  to  the  Northern 
States.  On  this  mission  he  served  dur- 
ing the  first  sixteen  months  as  clerk  of 
the  Minnesota  Conference  and  later 
as  president  of  the  South  Indiana  Con- 
ference. He  returned  from  his  mission 
in  February,  1922,  and  continued  his 
activities  in  the  Church.  Thus  he 
acted  in  the  superintendency  of  the 
Sunday  school  of  the  Lehi  First  Ward 
from  1922  to  1923,  when  he  was  called 
to  be  a  member  of  the  Sunday  School 
board  of  the  Alpine  Stake.  He  had 
previously  taught  in  Sunday  schools 
for  several  years.  In  his  youth  he 
served  as  counselor  in  a  Deacon's 
quorum  from  1907  to  1909,  as  secre- 
tary of  an  Elders'  Quorum  from  1915 
to  1917.  and  as  second  counselor  in  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


91 


presidency  of  an  Elders'  quorum  from 
1917  to  1919.  After  returning  from 
his  mission  Elder  Goates  acted  as  a 
teacher  in  the  ward  Elders'  quorum, 
although  at  the  time  he  was  an  or- 
dained Seventy.  He  was  also  active 
in  M.  I.  A.  work  and  was  the  first  M 
Men  leader  in  the  Lehi  First  Ward. 

In  July,  1^24,  he  was  appointed 
clei-k  of  the  Lehi  First  Ward,  in  which 
position  he  acted  until  the  Lehi  Stake 
was  organized  July  1,  1928,  when  he 
was  appointed  to  act  as  clerk  of  the 
newly  organized  Stake.  On  Nov.  11, 
1928,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  appointed  group  leader  of  the 
High  Priests  of  the  Lehi  First  Ward. 

Elder  Goates  received  his  education 
in  the  public  schools  of  Lehi,  graduat- 
ing from  the  Lehi  High  School  in  1913, 
after  which  he  obtained  employment 
with  the  Lehi  branch  of  the  Utah- 
Idaho  Sugar  Company,  remaining  with 
this  institution  until  called  to  serve 
with  the  U.  S.  forces  in  the  World 
War.  From  June,  1918,  to  January, 
1919,  he  was  employed  in  the  Aviation 
Section  of  the  Signal  Corps,  most  of 
the  time  in  the  recruiting  service  at 
Vancouver  Barracks,  Washington. 

Bro.  Goates  entered  the  poultry  in- 
dustry in  1922,  as  one  of  the  pioneers 
of  this  industry  in  Lehi,  and  assisted 
in  establishing  the  Poultry  Coopera- 
tive Association  in  that  locality,  serv- 
ing as  one  of  the  directors  and  secre- 
tary of  the  Lehi  loct'T  branch  for 
several  years.  In  1934  he  was  ap- 
pointed secretary  and  treasurer  of  the 
Lehi  Irrigation  Company,  which  office 
he  still  holds. 

On  June  14,  1923,  he  married  Maesa 
L.  Anderson  (daughter  of  Andrew  B. 
Anderson  and  Hannah  Evans)  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  Four  children  have 
blessed  this  union,  namely,  Calvin  A., 
LeRee,  Wayne  A.,  and  Morris  A. 

HARDY,  Rufus  Kay,  one  of  the  first 
Seven  Presidents  of  Seventy,  was 
born  May  28,  1878,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
the  son  of  Rufus  H.  Hardy  and  Annie 


Kay.  From  his  childhood  he  was 
trained  to  take  an  active  part  in 
Church  affairs  and  was  baptized,  June 
1,  1886,  by  John  Cottam.  Continuing 
his  labors  in  the  Church,  he  was 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest,  and  was 
ordained  an  Elder  May  3,  1897,  by 
Elder  Joseph  Barnes.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  July  2,  1897,  by 
Apostle  John  Henry  Smith  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  New  Zealand. 


Arriving  in  Auckland,  N.  Z.,  August 
9,  1897,  he  was  assigned  to  labor  in 
the  Tauranga  District  and  was  later 
transferred  to  the  Waikato  District. 
He  returned  from  this  mission  Jan.  1, 
1901.  On  May  3,  1906,  he  was  set 
apart  as  one  of  the  presidents  of  the 
8th  Quorum  of  Seventy  by  J.  Golden 
Kimball.  On  April  2,  1903,  he  married 
Addie  Eldredge,  daughter  of  Joshua 
Eldredge  and  Lizzie  Winder,  and  early 
in  1907  was  called  to  preside  over  the 
New  Zealand  Mission.  To  this  posi- 
tion he  was  set  apart  Feb.  18,  1907, 
by  Pz-es.  Joseph  F.  Smith;  his  wife, 
who  accompanied  him,  was  set  apart 
on  the  same  occasion  by  Pres.  John 
R.  Winder.  Bro.  and  Sister  Hardy 
returned  from  this  mission  in  July, 
1909,   after  which   Elder   Hardy  con- 


Vol.  I\-.  No.   7 


December,   1935 


98 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


tinued  to  reside  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
actively  engaged  in  Church  work  and 
in  a  civil  capacity  holding  the  position 
of  supervisor  of  the  Inter-mountain 
District  for  the  Western  States  Life 
Insurance  Company,  being  associated 
with  this  company  for  a  period  of 
twenty-two  years.  In  1933,  Elder 
Hardy  was  a  second  time  called  to 
preside  over  the  New  Zealand  Mission, 
being  set  apart  for  this  position  June 
20,  1933,  by  Pres.  A.  W.  Ivins.  His 
wife  did  not  accompany  him  this  time. 
At  a  conference  held  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Oct.  6,  1934,  Elder  Hardy  was 
sustained  as  one  of  the  First  Seven 
Presidents  of  Seventy  and  on  that  ac- 
count was  released  from  his  labors 
in  the  New  Zealand  Mission  and,  ar- 
riving home  Dec.  5, 1934,  was  set  apart 
to  his  position  in  the  First  Council  of 
Seventy,  Feb.  7,  1935,  by  President 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

His  wife.  Sister  Addie  Eldredge 
Hardy,  formerly  a  member  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  Board  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  is 
now  a  member  of  the  General  Board 
of  Primary  Associations.  One  daugh- 
ter was  born  to  Bro.  and  Sister  Hardy, 
namely  Kay,  now  the  wife  of  Alan  B. 
Blood. 

President  Hardy  has  a  good  phy- 
sique and  a  pleasing  personality.  His 
stand  on  what  he  believes  to  be  right 
is  unswerving,  but  in  personal  matters 
he  is  always  willing  to  sacrifice  his 
own  desires  for  the  benefit  of  others. 

HOOPER,  John  Douglas,  5th  Bishop 
of  the  Hooper  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Weber  County,  Utah,  was  born  Nov. 
10,  1873,  in  Hooper,  Weber  County, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  W.  Hooper  and 
Elizabeth  Ann  Douglas.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  1,  1882,  by  Thomas  S. 
Johnson,  and  ordained  successively  to 
the  offices  of  Deacon  and  Elder.  In  his 
early  youth  he  took  an  active  part  in 
the  Hooper  Sunday  School  and  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  After  being  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty April  8,  1895,  by  Apostle  Franklin 
D.    Richards,   he   filled    a    mission   to 


Hawaii  in  1895-1898.  Later  he  labored 
as  an  assistant  to  Thomas  A.  Wad- 
doups  among  the  Hawaiians  at  losepa, 
Skull  Valley,  Utah,  and  in  1915-1918 
he  filled  a  mission  to  England.  In 
1919  (Dec.  21)  he  married  Ellen  Child, 
daughter  of  Bishop  William  W.  Child, 
which  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
five  children,  namely,  John  Child,  Ruth 
Child,  Irene  Child,  Afton  Child,  and 
Jennie  Child.  His  wife  died  April  26, 
1912,  and  on  Jan.  8,  1919,  he  married 
Joanna  M.  Weaver.  There  are  no 
children  from  this  marriage.  Bishop 
Hooper  is  a  farmer  and  salesman  by 
avocation,  and  besides  filling  a  number 
of  ecclesiastical  positions  he  has  acted 
as  deputy  sheriflf,  school  trustee,  mem- 
ber of  the  Board  of  Education,  etc., 
in  Weber  County,  and  also  as  secre- 
tary of  the  Weber  River  Water  Users 
Association.  As  a  man  of  affairs 
Bishop  Hooper  has  made  a  fine  record, 
both  in  ecclesiastical  and  secular  cir- 
cles, 

HORSLEY,  Thomas  Herbert,  Bishop 
of  the  Soda  Springs  Ward,  Idaho 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1901  to  1917,  was 


born  Feb.  22,  1865,  in  Nephi,  Juab 
County,  Utah,  the  son  of  Herbert 
Horsley  and  Sarah  Edgell;  moved  with 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


99 


his  parents  to  Provo  and  later  to 
Providence,  Cache  County;  thence  to 
Paris,  Idaho,  and  in  1870  located  at 
Soda  Springs,  where  he  was  raised, 
received  a  common  school  education 
and  was  baptized  by  Alma  Hayes  when 
about  12  years  old.  He  was  ordained 
a  Teacher  and  later  an  Elder  and  took 
an  active  part  in  Church  affairs  gener- 
ally as  he  grew  to  manhood. 

On  October  20,  1888,  he  married 
Louise  Dorothy  Lau  in  the  Logan 
Temple.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  nine  children,  namely, 
Elsie  Irene,  Zina  Edna,  Dorothy 
Louise,  Gladys  Winefred,  Milton  Lau, 
Everett  Lee,  Grant  Elmer,  Louise 
Daphney  and  Lee  Herbert.  In  Sun- 
day school  matters  Bro.  Horsley  has 
been  very  active,  serving  as  secretary 
of  the  Soda  Springs  Sunday  school  for 
20  years.  He  has  also  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  local  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
took  a  Sunday  school  course  in  the 
Pi'ovo  Academy  during  the  summer  of 
1894-95.  Later  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  to  act  as 
a  member  of  the  High  Council  in  the 
Bannock  Stake,  and  on  April  29,  1901, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
John  W.  Taylor  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Soda  Springs  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  for  16  years,  or 
until  Feb.  25,  1917,  when  he  was 
honorably  released  and  chosen  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  in  the 
Idaho  Stake,  which  position  he  still 
(1934)  holds. 

Bishop  Horsley  has  served  in  several 
important  and  responsible  positions  of 
a  civil  nature.  Thus  he  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Soda  Springs  city  council 
for  ten  years,  during  which  he  took 
an  active  part  in  the  construction  of 
city  water  works  and  in  the  erection 
of  an  electric  light  plant. 

JONES,  Willard  Larson,  president 
of  the  Moapa  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
May  19,  1879,  in  Washington,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Thomas  J.  Jones  and 
Johanna  C.  Larson.     He  was  baptized 


by  his  father  on  his  eighth  birthday 
anniversary  and  in  due  course  he  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  and  presided  over  a 
quorum;  later  he  acted  as  a  ward 
teacher  and  president  of  the  ward  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  He  grew  up  on  the  farm 
and,  being  the  oldest  of  his  father's 
six  sons,  worked  with  them,  farming, 
riding  the  range  and  looking  after 
cattle.  When  18  years  old,  young 
Willard  commenced  to  work  for  the 
White    Hills    Mining    Company    as    a 


freighter,  driving  a  six  mule  team. 
He  continued  at  this  work  until  he  was 
20  years  old  when  he  was  called  on  a 
mission.  After  being  ordained  an 
Elder  by  his  father  Oct.  21,  1899,  he 
received  his  blessings  in  the  St.  George 
Temple,  Oct.  25,  1899,  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Pi-es.  Jos.  W.  McMurrin 
and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Southwestern  States.  He  labored  in 
the  Lone  Star  Confez-ence,  and  was 
first  counselor  to  the  president  of  that 
conference  for  a  year  and  a  half. 
Returning  from  this  mission  in  March, 
1902,  he  took  a  government  contract 
to  carry  mail  from  Moapa  to  Good- 
springs,  Nevada.  This  position  he  held 
until  the  completion  of  the  Salt  Lake 
and  Los  Angeles  Railroad  in  1905. 

Having  become  a  resident  of  Over- 
ton, Nevada,  Bro.  Jones  was  sustained 


100 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


as  2nd  Counselor  to  Bishop  Bunker  of 
that  ward  Sept.  6,  1906,  whom  he 
succeeded  as  Bishop  of  the  Overton 
Ward,  Sept.  18,  1908,  being  ordained 
and  set  apart  to  that  position  by 
Apostle  George  Albert  Smith. 

In  1912,  Bro.  Jones  represented 
Clark  County,  Nevada,  in  the  Nevada 
Legislature,  being  the  first  represen- 
tative of  that  newly  organized  county. 

At  the  organization  of  Moapa  Stake, 
June  9, 1912,  Bishop  Jones  was  selected 
to  preside  over  the  new  stake,  which 
position  he  still  holds. 

On  May  24,  1914,  he  married  Lois 
E.  Earl  of  Bunkerville,  in  the  St. 
George  Temple;  this  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  seven  children,  one 
son  and  six  daughters.  Pres.  Jones 
has  been  active  in  a  number  of  import- 
ant  enterprises  which  have  added 
to  the  development  of  southern  Ne- 
vada. 

JUDD,  Robert  Lund,  a  member  of 
the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
Board,  was  born  July  6,  1885,  at 
Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Judd 
and  Mary  Lund,  both  of  St.  George, 
Utah.  He  was  baptized  at  eight  years 
of  age  by  William  T.  Atkin  in  the  St. 
George  Temple,  and  ordained  a  deacon 
at  the  age  of  twelve.  On  July  8,  1898, 
his  mother  died,  and  he  then  went  to 
live  with  his  father's  first  family, 
whei-e  he  was  very  happy.  That  same 
year  Thomas  Judd  was  called  by  Pres. 
Wilford  Woodruff  to  colonize  several 
large  ranches  the  Church  had  acquired 
in  White  River  and  Steptoe  Valleys, 
White  Pine  County,  Nevada.  Robert, 
with  the  family,  moved  to  Nevada  in 
the  spring  of  1899.  Three  towns  known 
as  Lund,  Preston  and  Georgetown, 
were  established  on  the  ranches  that 
had  been  acquired.  During  the  follow- 
ing yeai-s  up  to  the  fall  of  1903  young 
Robert  received  a  real  training  in 
farming,  freighting,  cattle-raising  and 
other  pioneer  activities.  In  the  latter 
part  of  the  last  named  year  the  family 


moved  to  LaVerkin,  Washington  Co., 
Utah.    Having  received  a  rudimentary 
education,  Robert,  in  the  fall  of  1904, 
entered    the    Agricultural    College    at 
Logan,     from     which     institution     he 
graduated  in  1909  with  the  degree  of 
B.  S.     He  studied  law  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Chicago,  graduating  with  the 
degree  of  LLB  in   1910.     Later  that 
same  year  he  was  admitted  to  the  Bar 
of  the  State  of  Utah  and  began  prac- 
ticing his  profession  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
During    the    time    he    was    attending 
law  school  in  Chicago  he  was,  in  June, 
1908,  ordained  an  Elder  by  Pres.  Ger- 
man   E.    Ellsworth   of   the    Northern 
States  Mission,  and  during  the  holiday 
seasons  and  one  summer  did  work  as  a 
regular  missionary  in  the  field.    Upon 
coming  to  Salt  Lake  he  located  in  the 
12-13th  Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  where  he 
was   active   in   the   Church   organiza- 
tions, at  one  time  being  both  superin- 
tendent   of    the    Sunday    School    and 
president  of  the  Young  Men's  Mutual. 
On  March  4,  1919,  he  was  set  apart  as 
a  member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Deseret    Sunday    School    Union.     For 
twenty  years  he  has  been  associated 
with  Mr.  E.  M.  Bagley  in  the  practice 
of  the  law,  and  for  ten  years  a  member 
of  the  firm  of  Bagley,  Judd  and  Ray 
In  1920  he  was  appointed  one  of  the 
attorneys  for  the  Church.  Shortly  after 
the  passing  of  Franklin  S.  Richards, 
general    counsel    for   the    Church,    in 
August,  1934,  Elder  Judd  was  appoint- 
ed to  that  office  as  his  successor.    At 
the  present  time  he  is  a  member  of 
the   State   Bar   examining   committee 
and  chairman  of  the  committee  on  ar- 
ranging for  the  holding  of  a  term  of 
the  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  of  the 
Tenth  Circuit  in  Salt  Lake  City — an- 
nually if  possible.    He  is  a  member  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  and  County  Bar,  the 
Utah  State  Bar  and  the  American  Bar 
Association.     On  September  22,  1914, 
Brother    Judd    married    Mary    Grant, 
daughter  of  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant  and 
Augusta  Winters.     This  marriage  has 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


101 


been  blessed  with  seven  children, 
namely,  Thomas  G.,  Augusta  G., 
Marian  G.,  Katherine  G.,  Robert  L. 
Jun.,  Ruth  (who  died  in  infancy)  and 
Pauline  G.  Brother  Judd  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Utah  State  Legisla- 
ture in  1913,  and  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Utah  State 
Agricultural  College  from  1920  to 
1924.  He  is  a  member  of  the  board 
of  directors  of  the  "Deseret  News"  and 
of  the  Deseret  Book  Company  and  has 
held  many  other  positions  of  trust  in 
the  Church  and  in  the  community. 

Just  recently  he  has  been  appointed 
director  and  vice-chairman  of  the 
Metropolitan  Water  Board  of  Salt 
Lake  City. 

KOOYMAN,  Frank  lemke,  a  counse- 
lor in  the  pi-esidency  of  the  High 
Priests'  quorum  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
of  Zion,  was  born   Nov.   12,   1880,   at 


Midsland,  isle  of  Terschelling,  Nether- 
lands, the  son  of  Daniel  Kooyman  and 
Neeke  Kooyman — his  parents  having 
the  same  surname.  He  was  the  sixth 
child  in  a  family  of  nine,  three  of 
whom  became  members  of  the  Church 
of  Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints; 
attended  common  and  advanced  schools 
in  the  Netherlands,  and  L.  D.  S.  Busi- 


ness College  in  Salt  Lake  City;  was 
employed  in  the  district  court  office  in 
Amsterdam  from  his  17th  to  his  22nd 
year;  accepted  the  restored  gospel  in 
his  nineteenth  year,  and  was  baptized 
April  29,  1899,  by  Elder  Alonzo  A. 
Hinckley.  He  was  called  on  a  mission 
in  his  native  land  in  1902,  and  filled 
a  full-time  mission  from  July  12,  1902 
(when  he  was  ordained  an  Elder  and 
set  apart  as  a  missionary  under  the 
hands  of  Mission  President  Sylvester 
Q.  Cannon)  until  Sept.  12,  1905,  labor- 
ing in  Rotterdam,  Arnhem,  and  again 
in  Rotterdam.  From  April  27,  1903, 
until  the  day  of  his  release  he  was 
assistant  editor  of  the  "Ster",  the  mis- 
sion paper.  He  translated  into  the 
Dutch  or  Netherlands  language,  a 
brief  history  of  the  Church,  by  Edward 
H.  Anderson,  revised  a  translation  of 
the  Voice  of  Warning,  by  Parley  P. 
Pratt,  and  also  translated  several  L. 
D.  S.  hymns. 

Elder  Kooyman  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  the  fall  of  1905,  locating  in  Salt 
Lake  City;  was  employed  as  book- 
keeper, first  with  the  Lambert  Paper 
Company,  and  later  with  the  Ander- 
son-Taylor Company,  wholesale  gro- 
cers. After  his  emigration,  he  was  a 
steady  contributor  to  the  Netherlands 
mission  paper,  as  well  as  to  the  "Utah- 
Nederlander,"  and  also  defended  and 
explained  "Mormonism"  in  several 
non-Mormon  periodicals  and  newspa- 
pers in  Holland,  including  the  "Nieuwe 
Courant",  "Studien,"  "Eenheid,"  the 
"Tempel,"  and  the  "Haagsche  Post." 
He  wrote  numerous  "Rympreekjes,"  or 
rhyming  sermonettes,  which  ran 
through  several  years  of  the  "Ster." 
On  Oct.  16,  1907,  Elder  Kooyman 
married  Elisabeth  Jacoba  van  der 
Toom,  daughter  of  Gerrit  Peter  van 
der  Toom  and  Johanna  Stolp,  who 
bore  him  seven  children:  Raymond 
Vandertoom,  Florence  Julia,  Lucile 
May,  Hilda  Louisa,  Ruby  Evangeline, 
Earl  Midsland  and  Harold  Stolp. 

Elder  Kooyman  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty by  President  J.  Golden  Kimball 


102 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


July  31,  1908,  and  served  as  a  presi- 
dent in  five  quorums  of  Seventy  in 
Salt  Lake  City  successively.  He  was 
naturalized  in  the  Third  District  Court 
of  Salt  Lake  County,  Dec.  18,  1911,  the 
certificate  of  naturalization  being  is- 
sued Dec.  28,  1911.  For  four  years, 
from  Aug.  6,  1909,  to  Nov.  7,  1913,  he 
pi-esided  over  the  L.  D.  S.  Hollanders' 
meetings  in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  under  the 
hands  of  Elder  Joseph  Fielding  Smith 
of  the  Council  of  the  Twelve,  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
John  Longden  of  the  19th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  Oct.  30,  1927.  In 
1929  he  was  called  to  preside  over  the 
Netherlands  Mission  and  was  set  apai't 
for  that  labor  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant 
on  Aug.  2  of  that  year,  succeeding 
Pres.  John  P.  Lillywhite,  and  landed 
in  Rotterdam,  with  wife  and  three 
children  (Ruby,  Earl  and  Harold)  Aug. 

21,  1929.  His  sojourn  in  Holland  lasted 
over  four  years  (Sister  Kooyman  and 
the  children  remaining  with  him  for 
three  years)  and  left  Rotterdam  Nov. 

22,  1933,  having  turned  the  affairs  of 
the  mission  over  to  his  successor, 
Thomas  Edgar  Lyon,  and  arrived  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Dec.  4,  1933. 

He  had  the  responsibility,  not  only 
of  guiding  the  Elders'  activities,  but 
also  of  putting  into  effect  the  new 
Church  policy  of  placing  the  branches 
and  auxiliaries  of  the  mission  under 
the  direction  of  local  members.  In 
addition  to  these  labors,  he  edited,  once 
more,  the  "Ster",  changing  its  name 
to  "De  Ster  van  Nederland"  (The 
Star  of  the  Netherlands),  started  the 
"Peptomist,"  a  monthly  missionary 
paper,  made  translations  of  hymns  and 
curi'ent  Church  literature,  including 
"Rational  Theology,"  by  Dr.  John  A. 
Widtsoe,  and  contributed  to  influential 
non-Mormon  papers,  such  as  the 
"Nieuwe  Rotterdamsche  Courant,"  the 
"Heraut,"  the  "Algemeen  Handels- 
blad"  and  the  "Utrechtsche  Nieuws- 
blad." 

Since    the    summer    of    1934.    Elder 


Kooyman  has  been  employed  in  the 
Church  Historian's  office,  and  he  has 
also  continued  his  writing  for  both 
Mormon  and  non-Mormon  publications. 
In  the  "Utah-Nederlander"  he  contri- 
buted a  column  entitled  "Tempelstads 
Ki-abbels"  (Temple  City  Scribbles)  un- 
til its  publication  was  discontinued  in 
Oct.,  1935.  He  was  a  teacher  in  the 
19th  Ward  Sunday  School  until  Dec. 
9,  1934,  when  he  was  appointed  to  his 
present  stake  office.  In  the  summer 
of  1935  he  translated  twenty-five 
Primary  songs  for  the  "Jeugdwerk" 
department  of  the  Netherlands  Mis- 
sion, and  is  at  present — Nov.,  1935 — 
translating  hymns  and  Sunday  School 
songs  for  a  new  edition  of  the  Dutch 
hymn  book — a  spare  time  hobby, 

KOOYMAN,  Elisabeth  Jacoba  van 
der  Toom,  president  of  the  Relief  So- 
cieties and  the  Young  Ladies'  M.  I.  A. 


and  Primary  Associations  in  the 
Netherlands  Mission  in  the  years  1929- 
1932,  was  born  May  19,  1877,  at  Am- 
sterdam, Netherlands,  the  daughter  of 
Gerrit  Peter  van  der  Toom  and  Jo- 
hanna Stolp.  When  18  years  of  age, 
she  joined  the  Church  in  the  city  of 
her  birth,  and  was  baptized  by  Elder 
Hendrik  DeBry.     Alluding  to  an  ex- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


103 


pression  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  who 
referred  to  himself  as  one  "born  out  of 
due  time,"  Elder  DeBry  called  his 
candidate  for  baptism  "born  in  due 
time,"  ready  with  all  her  heart,  as 
eager  for  the  message  of  the  restored 
gospel  as  the  hungry  baby  is  for  the 
mother's  milk. 

At  that  time  Sister  Kooyman  — then 
Miss  Van  der  Toom — was  following  a 
course  to  become  a  trained  nurse,  go- 
ing through  the  extensive  studies  and 
exacting  training  required  by  old 
world  hospitals.  Having  successfully 
passed  every  test,  she  consequently 
devoted  several  years  to  her  labors  of 
mercy,  both  in  institutions  for  the  sick 
and  in  private  homes.  In  the  spring  of 
1907,  urged  by  fervent  longing  to 
gather  with  the  Saints  in  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  she  emigrated  to  Utah. 
Here  she  met  her  future  husband. 
Elder  Frank  I.  Kooyman,  to  whom  she 
was  married  in  the  fall  of  that  same 
year,  seven  children  resulting  from 
this  union.  In  1929,  when  her  hus- 
band was  called  to  preside  over  the 
Netherlands  Mission,  she  accompanied 
him  to  their  native  land  and  for  three 
years  devotedly  and  efficiently  took 
charge  of  the  mission  groups  of  women 
and  girls  mentioned  above,  starting 
the  Gleaner  Girls'  and  Primary  groups 
in  Holland.  With  her  husband  she 
attended  the  European  Mission  presi- 
dents' conferences  held  in  Basel,  Switz- 
erland, in  1930;  in  Copenhagen,  Den- 
mark, in  1931,  and  in  Prague,  Czecho- 
slovakia, in  1932,  being  one  of  the 
speakers  at  the  dedication  of  the  mag- 
nificent L.  D.  S.  meeting  house  erected 
in  Denmark's  capital  at  the  time  of 
the  conference  there.  Traveling  to 
and  from  the  countries  named,  she 
also  visited  Belgium,  England,  France, 
Switzerland,  Germany  and  Sweden. 
With  the  youngest  three  of  the  chil- 
dren, who  had  accompanied  their  par- 
ents, she  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City 
in  the  fall  of  1932,  her  husband  re- 
maining in  the  Netherlands  15  months 
longer. 


At  home  Sister  Kooyman  has  been 
connected  with  the  Relief  Societies  of 
several  Salt  Lake  wards,  and  is  at 
present — Nov.,  1935 — serving  as  the 
secretary  of  the  19th  Ward  group.  She 
is  intensely  interested,  also,  in  Temple 
work,  having  procured  many  names 
of  her  kindred  dead.  Her  first  con- 
vincing and  soul-satisfying  impres- 
sions of  the  Lord's  great  latter-day 
work  have  been  deepened  and  sancti- 
fied by  years  of  unselfish  service. 


LARSEN,  John  W.  (See  Sketch  on 
page  38.) 

McFARLANE,  Horace  James,  third 
Bishop  of  the  Elmhurst  Ward,  San 
Francisco  Stake,  California,  was  born 
Oct.  9,  1894,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son 
of  James  McFarlane  and  Tirzah  Shaw, 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1904,  by  Peter 
G.  Paulson,  and,  after  officiating  in 
the  Aaronic  Priesthood  was  ordained 
an  Elder  Aug.  18,  1918,  by  Bishop  Wm. 
A.  Budge;  a  Seventy,  Dec.  12,  1920,  by 
Brigham  H.  Roberts,  and  a  High 
Priest  June  28,  1931,  by  Hyrum  H. 
Goddard.  After  receiving  his  educa- 
tion in  the  public  schools  of  Ogden  he 
followed  the  occupation  of  a  salesman 
from  1914  to  1918,  when  he  entered 
the    employ    of   the    Southern    Pacific 


104 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Company  in  the  office  of  the  superin- 
tendent and  later  was  transferred  to 
the  Division  Auditor's  Office  in  Ogden. 
During-  this  time  he  resided  in  the 
Ogden  Seventh  Ward,  where  he  acted 
as  ward  clerk  from  1919  to  1920;  also 
as  a  Sunday  school  teacher  and  for  a 
time  as  assistant  superintendent  of 
Sunday  schools.  While  in  Ogden 
he  acted  as  secretary  and  later 
as  a  president  of  the  98th  quorum  of 
Seventy,  holding  the  latter  position 
until  June  28,  1931.  In  October  1931 
he  was  transferred  by  the  railroad 
company  to  the  General  Office,  in  San 
Francisco.  On  January  24,  1932,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
George  F.  Richards  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Elmhurst  Ward. 

In  1916  (March  28th)  he  married 
Inez  Saunders  (daugther  of  Joseph 
Saunders  and  Hannah  Harbertson). 
About  two  years  later  this  union  was 
sealed  by  a  marriage  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  Three  children  have  been 
born  to  them,  namely,  Helen  Inez  (b. 
Nov.  21,  1916),  Adele  (b.  June  27, 
1920)  and  James  jun.  (b.  Feb.  7,  1927). 
Bishop  McFarlane  is  a  man  of  strict 
integrity  and  reliability  and  a  staunch 
Latter-day  Saint. 

MARGETTS,  Phillip,  the  dean  of 
Western  drama,  was  born  Feb.  10, 
1829,  at  Kineton,  Warwickshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Thomas  Margetts  and 
Alice  Bishop.  His  father  was  the 
oldest  son  of  Thomas  Margetts,  a 
coach  builder  and  wheelwright,  as  was 
his  father  and  his  father's  father 
before  him.  They  lived  in  a  snug  little 
corner  of  Oxfordshire,  England,  known 
as  Woodstock.  They  owned  property 
adjoining  the  estate  of  the  Duke  of 
Malborough.  In  1827  his  father  moved 
to  and  commenced  business  in  the 
little  town  called  Kineton,  about  eight 
miles  from  Stratford-on-Avon,  the 
birthplace  of  the  immortal  Shake- 
speare. After  remaining  some  time 
in  Kineton,  his  father  moved  with  his 


family  to  London,  where  he  com- 
menced business  as  a  contractor  and 
builder.  About  this  time  the  building 
of  the  first  railroads  in  the  world  took 
place  and  about  the  year  1840  his 
father  took  a  contract  on  the  Man- 
chester and  Birmingham  Railway.  It 
was  during  this  period  that  the  Mar- 
getts family  first  heard  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ  as  introduced  and  taught 
by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  All 
the  family  except  his  father  joined  the 


Church.  He  was  a  true  believer  in  the 
doctrines  of  the  Church,  but  his  busi- 
ness at  that  time  caused  a  delay.  He 
was  compelled  to  return  to  London 
where  he  was  taken  sick,  and  in  a  few 
weeks  died.  Bro.  Lorenzo  Snow,  a  dear 
friend  of  the  family,  visited  him  dur- 
ing his  sickness,  and  afterwards 
preached  his  funeral  sermon.  This 
was  in  1842.  The  family  remained  in 
London  for  some  time,  but  later  moved 
to  different  parts  of  England. 

Phillip  Margetts  was  one  of  the  first 
locomotive  engineers  in  the  world.  The 
railways  on  which  he  served  were  the 
London  and  Birmingham,  Chester  and 
Birkenhead,  Chester  and  Shrewsbury, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


105 


and  at  the  time  he  left  England  for 
America  he  held  a  position  on  the  Lon- 
don and  North  Western  Railway.  He 
often  said  that  if  it  hadn't  been  for 
his  faith  in  "Mormonism"  he  would 
not,  at  that  time,  have  taken  a  thou- 
sand pounds  sterling  to  give  up  his 
work,  as  he  considered  it  as  good  as 
a  position  under  the  English  govern- 
ment. 

In  Januai-y,  1850,  in  company  with 
his  mother,  sister  Ann,  and  two  broth- 
ers, Richard  and  Henry,  he  left  Liver- 
pool, England,  on  the  ship  "Argo"  for 
New  Orleans,  where  they  ari-ived  on 
March  8, 1850,  after  being  on  the  ocean 
nearly  eight  weeks.  At  New  Orleans 
the  company  boarded  the  river  steam- 
er "Uncle  Sam"  and  went  up  the  Mis- 
sissippi River  to  St.  Louis.  It  took 
them  two  weeks  to  reach  their  destina- 
tion. From  there  he  crossed  the  plains 
with  ox  teams  as  far  as  the  upper 
crossing  of  the  Platte  River,  where 
he  left  the  train  by  permission  and 
started  to  walk  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
City  with  his  brother.  It  took  them 
nineteen  days  to  make  the  trip. 

Mr.  Margetts  was  one  of  the  minute 
men  organized  in  Utah  to  protect  the 
early  settlers  from  the  Indians,  and 
during  the  years  of  1850-52  often  saw 
real  fighting.  Being  also  a  blacksmith 
he  made  some  of  the  first  mill  irons, 
assisted  in  making  cane  mills  and 
many  other  necessary  and  useful  ar- 
ticles during  pioneer  days. 

In  April,  1857,  he  started  with  72 
others  on  a  mission  to  England,  cross- 
ing the  plains  with  handcarts,  and  to 
them  remains  the  distinction  of  being 
the  only  party  of  handcart  mission- 
aries that  ever  left  Utah.  Dr.  Seymour 
B.  Young  and  David  Wilkins  were  his 
handcart  companions.  In  1858  he 
returned  home,  the  Americans  being 
recalled  from  their  fields  of  labor  be- 
cause of  the  Utah  war.  During  his 
absence  the  so-called  "Move"  had 
taken  place,  and  he  found  on  his  re- 
turn that  his  wife  and  three  children 
had  been  moved  300  miles  south.  When 


the  trouble  with  Johnston's  Army  was 
over,  Pres.  Brigham  Young  furnished 
him  with  a  wagon  and  horses  to  bring 
his  family  back  to  Salt  Lake  City. 

Mr.  Margetts  was  one  of  the  cast  of 
players  that  introduced  the  drama  in 
Utah  in  the  "Old  Bowery,"  situated  on 
the  southeast  corner  of  the  Temple 
Block,  in  the  spring  of  1851.  "Robert 
Macaire"  was  the  bill.  Ten  years  later 
he  was  one  of  the  notable  players  who 
opened  the  "Social  Hall"  with  "The 
Lady  of  Lyons."  Ten  years  later, 
when  the  Salt  Lake  Theatre  was  open- 
ed, March,  1862,  Mr.  Margetts  again 
had  a  foremost  place,  and  from  that 
time  forward  until  he  retired  from  the 
drama  he  was  the  most  active  figure 
in  theatrical  life  that  Salt  Lake  City 
has  known. 

Mr.  Margetts  married  Elizabeth 
Bateman,  daughter  of  Thomas  and 
Mary  Bateman,  pioneers,  Nov.  5,  1850. 
His  wife  died  in  June,  1896.  Fourteen 
children  blessed  this  union,  seven  sons 
and  seven  daughters. 

At  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  open- 
ing of  the  Salt  Lake  Theatre  Mr. 
Margetts  recited  Othello's  address  be- 
fore the  senate.  His  rendition  brought 
deafening  applause  from  the  large 
audience. 

"In  the  histrionic  chapter  of  Utah's 
early  history  the  name  of  'Phil'  Mar- 
getts stands  preeminent."  "There  is 
scarcely  a  phase  of  Utah  history  but 
would  be  shown  in  a  complete  bio- 
graphy of  Mr.  Margetts  were  such  an 
account  in  existence." 

The  Salt  Lake  City  daily  newspa- 
pers of  Sept.  1  and  2,  1914,  announced 
"the  passing  of  Utah's  famed  actor 
and  Dean  of  Western  drama  just  64 
years  to  the  day  from  the  time  he  first 
entered  the  Salt  Lake  Valley,  Sept.  1, 
1850.  He  was  then  a  young  man  of 
twenty-one  years  of  age.  This  youth, 
to  *f ortune  and  fame  unknown,  was  to 
play  an  important  part  in  the  drama 
of  the  west  which  had  just  begun,  for 
he  was  to  be  remembered  as  few  others 
have  been  among  the  list  of  those  who 


106 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


made  smiles  take  the  place  of  tears  in 
the  trying  days,  who  did  so  much  to 
lighten  the  burdens  of  the  pioneers, 
and  who  exercised  an  uplifting  influ- 
ence in  the  life  of  the  people."  For 
further  particulars  see:  Tullidge's 
Magazine,  Vol.  2;  Juvenile  Instructor, 
Vol.  38;  A  Romance  of  an  Old  Play- 
house, by  George  D.  Pyper;  Lindsay's 
Mormons  and  the  Theatre;  Histories 
of  Utah. 

NIELSEN,  Thor  Christian,  Bishop 
of  Long  Beach  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  was  born  March  25, 
1872,  in  Brigham  City,  Box  Elder  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jens  C.  Nielsen,  and 
Margarethe  Frederiksen.  The  senior 
Nielsen  joined  the  Church  on  the  Is- 
land of  Bornholm,  and  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1871.  At  the  age  of  eight 
years  Thor  became  a  member  of  the 
Brigham  City  Brass  Band,  and  when 
twelve  years  old,  he  became  a  member 
of  the  Brigham  City  3rd  Ward  Choir, 
and  at  fifteen  its  leader.  Under  the 
able  instruction  of  his  father  he  be- 
came proficient  at  an  early  age  in  the 
making  of  furniture  and  was  placed 
in  charge  of  the  furniture  department 
of  the  Brigham  City  Co-op.  In  1890, 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  Denmark  in  1890-1892, 
laboring  principally  on  the  island  of 
Bornholm,  and  in  Aalborg.  In  the 
latter  place  he  organized  a  choir  which 
was  largely  instrumental  in  bringing 
many  to  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel. 
In  June,  1893,  he  married  Olivia  Han- 
sen in  the  Logan  Temple,  which  union 
was  blessed  with  three  children, 
namely,  Lydia  Olivia,  Thor  Sherman, 
and  Eugene  Christian.  In  1895  the 
family  moved  to  Montpelier,  Idaho, 
where  Bro.  Nielsen  started  the  Nielsen 
Furniture  Company,  which  has  been 
conducted  successfully  until  the  pres- 
ent time,  or  nearly  38  years.  On  July 
6,  1904,  accompanied  by  his  wife  and 
two  children,  he  went  on  a  visit  to 
Scandinavia.  After  touring  Sweden 
and  Norway,  they  were  called  to  labor 


as  missionaries  in  Copenhagen,  where 
Elder  Nielsen  led  the  branch  choir.  A 
year  later  the  family  went  to  Chris- 
tiania  to  direct  the  splendid  choir 
there,  Lydia,  the  daughter,  being  or- 
ganist. In  1909,  Bro.  Nielsen  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  called  to  act 
as  second  counselor  to  the  Bishop  of 
the  Montpelier  2nd  Ward.  Two  years 
later  he  was  promoted  to  the  position 
of  first  counselor.  In  1910,  he  repre- 
sented Bear  Lake  County  in  the  Idaho 
State  Legislature.  In  1927,  moving 
temporarily  to  Long  Beach,  California, 
he  was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Long 
Beach  Ward,  being  ordained  to  that 
position  Aug.  29,  1927.  He  held  that 
position  until  his  return  to  Montpelier, 
Idaho,  in  1931.  At  present  he  is  chor- 
ister of  the  Montpelier  Stake  Choir 
and  superintendent  of  the  Montpelier 
4th  Ward  Sunday  School.  Lydia  Niel- 
sen Jones,  the  daughter,  now  functions 
as  organist  of  the  Los  Angeles  Stake 
Choir,  the  oldest  son,  Thor  Sherman 
Nielsen,  has  acted  as  Bishop  of  the 
Wilmington  Ward,  Los  Angeles  Stake, 
California,  and  the  youngest  son, 
Eugene  Christian  Nielsen,  has  filled 
a  mission  in  Denmark. 

NIELSEN,  Thor  Sherman,  Bishop  of 
the  Wilmington  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  was  born  July  8, 
1901,  in  Montpelier,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
Thor  C.  Nielsen,  and  Olivia  Hansen. 
When  SVj  years  old,  he  accompanied 
his  parents  on  a  visit  to  Scandinavia, 
which  gave  him  a  wondei'ful  experi- 
ence as  a  child.  On  that  trip  he  had  his 
first  experience  in  the  musical  line  by 
singing  soprano  with  the  girls  in  his 
father's  choir.  In  Montpelier,  Idaho,  he 
received  a  common  school  education, 
he  was  baptized  July  8,  1909,  and  later 
ordained  a  Deacon  by  Bishop  J.  H. 
HoflF.  At  an  early  age,  he  became  a 
partner  in  his  father's  furniture  busi- 
ness. At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  took 
charge  of  a  music  store,  while  his 
father  was  away  on  a  winter  vacation. 
After    graduating    from    the    Mont- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


107 


pelier   Junior    High    School,    in    May, 

1917,  he  became  interested  in  his 
father's  furniture  business,  but  was 
sent  to  Long  Beach,  California,  to 
study  at  the  Polytechnic  High  School, 
in  which  he  graduated  in  the  spring 
of  1920.  He  acted  as  secretary  of  the 
Long  Beach  Branch  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in 

1918,  and  as  first  assistant  of  the 
High  School  Book  Exchange  in  1918- 

1919,  He  served  as  manager  of  the 
so-called  student  body  store  in  1919- 

1920,  and  had  a  staff  of  three  assist- 
ant managers  and  twenty  clerks.  This 
institution  has  grown  into  a  store  do- 
ing a  business  of  nearly  |50,000  in 
one  year.  During  vacations  Bro. 
Nielsen  worked  in  the  furniture  store 
and  acquired  a  one-third  interest  in 
that  institution.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Edward  C.  Rich,  Sept.  25, 
1920,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States  in  1920-1923,  laboring  in 
the  states  of  New  York,  Connecticut, 
Maryland  and  New  Jersey,  and  for  a 
short  time  as  president  of  the  Albany 
Conference.  After  returning  from  his 
mission  he  spent  three  years  in  the 
University  of  Southern  California's 
College  of  Commerce,  and  built  up  a 
real  estate  business  in  Wilmington. 
In  a  Church  capacity  he  served  as  1st 
assistant  of  the  Long  Beach  Latter- 
day  Saint  Sunday  School.  In  1928, 
(Feb.  8)  he  married  Ruth  Smith,  in 
the  Mesa  Temple.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Daniel  H.  McAllister, 
Nov.  23,  1927,  and  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Long  Beach  Ward  Sun- 
day School.  He  also  took  charge  of  a 
branch  Sunday  School  organized  at 
Wilmington.  On  Dec.  28,  1930,  he  was 
chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Wilmington 
Ward,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  by  Apostle  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard, Feb.  21,  1931.  At  that  time  96 
families  of  Latter-day  Saints  had  lo- 
cated in  Wilmington.  So  far,  Bishop 
Nielsen  has  exhibited  considerable 
ability  as  a  leader,  both  in  religious 
and  secular  affairs. 


PALMER,  Asael  Exile,  second 
president  of  the  Lethbridge  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  Nov.  26,  1888,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
M.  Palmer  and  Christina  Helen  Lar- 
son. When  about  3  years  old  he 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Aurora, 
Sevier  County,  Utah,  where  he  at- 
tended the  district  school,  and  in 
March,  1903,  when  14  years  old,  moved 
with  his  parents  to  Raymond,  Alberta, 
Canada,  where  he  became  a  student 
at  the  Knight  Academy  from  1910  to 
1913,  and  taking  a  High  School  course, 
he  graduated  from  that  institution. 
Before  leaving  Aurora,  Utah,  he  was 
baptized  Aug.  1,  1897,  by  George 
Payne,  and  when  quite  young  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  at  Aurora,  and  later 
a  Teacher,  and  still  later  a  Seventy 
at  Raymond.  He  presided  over  the 
Deacon's  quorum  at  Raymond  and  also 
acted  as  president  of  the  student  body 
at  the  Knight  Academy.  He  was  the 
first  president  of  the  Raymond  Second 
Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  later  acted 
as  second  counselor  in  the  Taylor 
Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  organization. 
From  1913  to  1917  he  attended  the 
Utah  Agricultural  College  in  Logan, 
obtaining  from  that  institution  the 
B.  S.  degree.  In  1916  (Oct.  5)  he 
married  Maydell  Cazier  of  Nephi, 
Utah,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  This 
union  has  been  blessed  with  four  chil- 
dren, viz.,  Asael  Adelbert,  Maydell 
Camille,  Eileen,  and  Byron  Cazier.  In 
1928  he  received  a  Master  of  Science 
degree  from  the  University  of  Alberta 
at  Edmonton.  In  1917,  he  was  em- 
ployed as  soil  chemist  by  the  Cana- 
dian Pacific  Railroad.  In  1919-1921 
he  served  as  principal  of  the  Knight 
Academy  at  Raymond,  and  also  held 
the  position  as  stake  superintendent  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Taylor  Stake. 
On  Nov.  10,  1921,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Hugh  B.  Brown  of 
the  Lethbridge  Stake  of  Zion  by 
Apostle  Rudger  Clawson,  which  posi- 


108 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


tion  he  held  until  1926,  when  he  suc- 
ceeded Brother  Brown  as  president  of 
said  Stake.  This  position  he  still  holds. 
Prior  to  this  he  had  been  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Apostle  Hyrum  M.  Smith 
and  was  a  president  of  the  145th  Quo- 
rum of  Seventy.  Bro.  Palmer  was  ap- 
pointed assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Dominion  Experimental  Station  at 
Lethbridge,  Nov.  10,  1921,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  holds.  Since  his  earliest 
youth,  President  Palmer  has  been  ac- 
tive and  successful  in  the  discharge  of 
his  ecclesiastical  as  well  as  secular 
duties  in  the  many  public  offices  he 
has  held. 

PALMER,  William  Moroni,  presi- 
dent of  the  Northwestern  States  Mis- 
sion in  1880-1889  was  born  Dec.  10, 
1846,  in  Lee  County,  Iowa,  the  son  of 
Abraham  Palmer  and  Patience  Delilah 
Pierce.  He  emigrated  from  Iowa  to 
Utah  with  his  parents  in  1852,  and  lo- 
cated in  Ogden,  Weber  County,  where 
his  father  became  the  owner  of  the 
land  on  which  the  present  Union  Sta- 
tion in  Ogden  now  stands.  Later  he 
moved  with  his  parents  to  Chicken 
Creek,  Juab  County,  Utah,  and  on  Dec. 
13,  1868,  he  married  Mary  Ann  Mellor 
who  had  crossed  the  Plains  in  Edward 
Martin's  Hand-cart  Company  in  1856. 
She  bore  her  husband  nine  children, 
namely,  William  Moroni,  Patience 
Delilah,  James  Lindsay,  Charles  Abra- 
ham, Don  Carlos,  Parley  Parker,  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff,  Delbert  and  Francis 
Marion.  In  1876-1877  Bro.  Palmer 
filled  a  mission  to  Michigan.  Shortly 
after  his  return  he  was  again  called 
to  labor  in  Michigan,  where  other 
Elders  were  sent  to  work  under  his 
direction.  These  Elders  were  sent  to 
various  parts  of  that  and  surround- 
ing states,  resulting  in  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Northwestern  States  Mis- 
sion (now  the  Northern  States  Mis- 
sion). President  Palmer  presided  over 
the  Northern  States  Mission  from 
1880  to  1889.  Though  Elder  Palmer's 
opportunities  of  education  as  a  child 


and  youth  had  been  exceedingly  limit- 
ed, he  was  successful  on  this  mission, 
and  later  in  life  he  obtained  a  good 
practical  education  and  became  a  great 
scriptorian  and  an  ardent  missionary. 
In  fact  from  the  time  he  was  called  on 
his  first  mission  until  the  end  of  his 
life  he  devoted  the  greater  part  of  his 
time  to  preaching  the  gospel  both  at 
home  and  abroad. 

In  1881  (Dec.  15)  he  married  Chris- 
tina Helen  Larson,  of  Bergsjo,  near 
Sundsvall,  Sweden,  in  the  Endowment 
House  in  Salt  Lake  City.  The  result 
of  this  union  was  11  children,  viz., 
Helen  Christina,  John  Melvin,  Willard 
Taylor,  Asael  Exile  (now  President  of 
the  Lethbridge  Stake  of  Zion),  Ada 
Ann,  Artie  May,  Fern,  Leslie  Larson 
(now  second  counselor  in  the  Raymond 
Second  Ward  Bishopric),  Glenn  Cecil, 
Ai'lo  Verlin  (now  President  of  the 
Wrentham  Branch),  and  Margaret 
Lucille.  Bro.  Palmer  traveled  for  a 
number  of  years  throughout  the 
Church  as  a  representative  of  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  and  located  permanently 
in  Raymond,  Albei'ta.  This  was  his 
home  until  the  time  of  his  death,  which 
occurred  Jan.  25,  1929.  Brother  Pal- 
mer was  always  true  and  faithful  to 
his  Chui-ch  and  to  his  people,  and  as  a 
missionary  he  became  an  instrument 
in  the  hands  of  the  Lord  to  convert 
hundreds  of  people. 

PETERSON,  Virgil  Hyrum,  first 
counselor  to  President  A.  Carlos  Schow 
in  the  Lehi  Stake  presidency,  was 
born  Dec.  13,  1894,  at  Lehi,  Utah 
County,  Utah,  the  son  of  Andrew 
Peterson  and  Sarah  Emma  Webb.  In 
the  public  schools  of  Lehi,  and  also 
in  the  High  School  of  his  native  town, 
he  was  educated;  was  baptized  Mar. 
21,  1903,  by  Hyrum  Peterson,  took  an 
active  part  in  Church  affairs  from  his 
earliest  youth;  ordained  a  Deacon 
Feb.  10,  1906,  acted  as  a  counselor  in 
a  Deacon's  quorum,  was  ordained  a 
Teacher,  later  a  Priest,  and  on  May  6, 
1917,  ordained  an  Elder  by  George  S, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


109 


Schow.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1917-1919,  laboring 
in  the  Minnesota  Conference,  and  act- 
ed as  conference  president  from  Sept. 
2,  1918,  until  his  return  in  April,  1919. 
After  his  return  to  Utah  he  presided 
over  the  6th  quorum  of  Elders  in  the 
Alpine  Stake,  and  later  was  president 
of  the  13th  quorum,  Alpine  Stake.  He 
also  labored  as  a  home  missionary  in 
the  Alpine  Stake.  In  1919  (Sept.  3) 
he  married  Rebecca  Leota  Taylor  in 


the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  which  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  four  children, 
viz:  Vere  T.,  Ruth  Emma,  Paul  Kay 
and  Don  Arvin.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  14,  1928, 
by  Patriarch  Hyrum  G.  Smith  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Lehi  Fifth 
Ward,  having  been  sustained  in  that 
position  Aug.  7,  1927.  On  July  1, 
1928,  he  was  chosen  and  sustained  as 
first  counselor  in  the  Lehi  Stake  presi- 
dency, being  set  apart  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards.  A  week  later  (July  8,  1928), 
he  was  released  from  his  bishopric  in 
the  Lehi  Fifth  Ward.  Brother  Peter- 
son is  a  farmer  by  avocation,  is  a 
director  and  president  of  the  Lehi  Ir- 
rigation Company  and  takes  a  leading 
part  in  both  ecclesiastical  and  secular 
affairs.     He  has  served  as  a  member 


of  the  Lehi  City  Council  since  Jan. 
1,  1934. 

RICHARDS,  Emily  Sophia  Tanner, 

wife  of  Franklin  S.  Richards,  was  the 
daughter  of  Nathan  and  Rachel  Tan- 
ner, who  were  friends  of  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith.  She  was  born  on  the 
13th  day  of  May,  1850,  at  South  Cot- 
tonwood, Utah.  When  she  was  six 
years  old,  her  parents  moved  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  she  attended  the 
best  schools  until  she  was  eighteen, 
and  then  she  became  the  wife  of 
Franklin  S.  Richards.  Their  first  home 
was  in  Ogden,  where  three  sons  were 
born  to  them  (Franklin  Dewey,  Jos- 
eph Tanner  and  William  Snyder),  two 
of  whom  pi-eceded  her  to  the  Great 
Beyond.  Her  family  was  augmented 
later  by  two  daughters,  whom  she 
adopted  and  upon  whom  she  bestowed 
much  care.  The  daughters  were  named 
Wealthy  Lucille  and  Emily  Helen. 

Soon  after  her  marriage,  she  be- 
came interested  in  Church  work,  which 
continued  during  her  entii*e  life.    She 


was  an  officer  in  the  Mutual  Improve- 
ment Association  and  in  the  Relief 
Society.  Her  husband's  mother,  Jane 
Snyder  Richards,  was  conspicuous  in 
the  organization  of  the  Relief  Society; 


110 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


for  several  years  she  was  a  counselor 
to  President  Zina  D.  Young,  and  she 
and  Emily  were  both  members  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Relief  Society 
for  nearly  thirty  years. 

After  moving  to  Salt  Lake  in  1884, 
Mrs.  Richards  was  a  director  of  the 
Orphans'  Home  about  thirty  years, 
and  a  charter  member  of  the  board  of 
directors  of  the  Sarah  Daft  Home  for 
many  years.  She  was  a  trustee  of  the 
Utah  Agricultural  College  ten  years 
and  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Trus- 
tees of  the  Salt  Lake  Public  Library. 
For  several  years  she  served  as  a 
member  of  the  State  Peace  Society 
and  was  president  of  the  Mother's 
Congress  of  Utah.  She  was  president 
of  the  Utah  Board  of  Lady  Managers 
to  the  Columbian  Exposition  at  Chi- 
cago in  1893  and  was  hostess  in  the 
Utah  building. 

The  chief  executives  of  our  state, 
from  Governor  Caleb  W.  West  to 
Governor  George  H.  Dern,  were  so 
familiar  with  her  record  that  she  was 
kept  in  mind  and  given  appointments 
to  many  important  positions.  During 
the  war,  she  was  a  member  of  the 
Utah  State  Council  of  Defense,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Women's  Liberty  Loan  Com- 
mittee, and  a  member  of  the  Execu- 
tive Committee  of  the  Red  Cross.  She 
was  also  one  of  the  one  hundred 
women  who,  led  by  Mrs.  Carrie  Chap- 
man Catt,  went  to  the  White  House 
and  offered  to  President  Wilson  the 
services  of  two  million  organized 
women,  pending  an  outbreak  of  war 

Mrs.  Richards  was  an  ardent  demo- 
crat and  suffragist.  She  led  the  fight 
for  the  adoption  of  suffrage  by  the 
Constitutional  Convention  of  Utah. 
When  triumphant,  party  leaders  asked 
her  to  accept  the  honor  of  being  the 
first  woman  to  be  elected  to  a  state 
senate,  but  she  declined.  When  the 
National  Suffrage  Amendment  was 
passed  in  1920,  the  League  of  Women 
Voters  was  organized  in  Salt  Lake 
City  under  the  direction  of  Mrs.  Catt, 
and  Mrs.  Richards  was  urged  to  be- 


come the  president  of  the  organiza- 
tion. She  declined  the  honor,  but  was 
an  active  member  of  the  league  during 
the  rest  of  her  life.  In  the  League's 
beautiful  home  at  Washington,  D,  C, 
is  a  "Roll  of  Honor,"  consisting  of 
bronze  tablets  bearing  the  names  of 
women  who  were  prominent  in  promot- 
ing the  cause  of  equal  suffrage.  Emily 
Sophia  Tanner  Richards  is  the  first 
name  on  the  Utah  tablet,  having  been 
placed  there  by  the  leading  women  of 
the  nation,  with  the  sanction  of  the 
leading  women  of  Utah. 

Her  husband's  professional  duties 
required  him  to  spend  much  time  in 
Washington  during  several  years,  and 
while  there,  Mrs.  Richards  became  ac- 
quainted with  the  leaders  of  women's 
movements,  as  well  as  with  the  wives 
of  cabinet  officers,  senators,  and  other 
prominent  people.  Among  her  ac- 
quaintances were  the  leading  suffra- 
gists, Susan  B.  Anthony,  Anna  How- 
ard Shaw,  Rachel  Foster  Avery  and 
Carrie  Chapman  Catt;  also,  Clara  Bar- 
ton, founder  of  the  Red  Cross,  Frances 
Willard,  president  of  the  Temperance 
Union,  and  Belva  A.  Lockwood,  the 
first  woman  lawyer  admitted  to  prac- 
tise in  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
United  States.  She  attended  many  re- 
ceptions given  by  distinguished  wom- 
en, and  did  excellent  missionary  work. 
As  they  were  eager  to  know  about 
Utah  affairs,  she  imparted  to  them 
much  valuable  information  concerning 
the  people  and  the  religion  of  the 
Latter-day  Saints. 

In  1888,  a  congress  was  held  in 
Washington  which  was  known  as  the 
World's  Congress  of  Representative 
Women,  who  met  to  organize  an  Inter- 
national Council.  This  meeting  marked 
a  very  critical  time  in  the  lives  of  the 
Latter-day  Saints  because  of  the  in- 
tense prejudice  existing  against  them. 
Mrs.  Richards,  as  the  representative  of 
the  Relief  Society,  the  Young  Ladies' 
Mutual  Improvement  Association  and 
the  Primary  Association,  delivered  an 
address   to   the   Congress   which   was 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


HI 


described  by  an  able  newspaper  writer, 
who  was  a  stranger  to  Mrs.  Richards, 
as  follows: 

"At  this  juncture  it  was  announced 
that  a  Utah  lady  would  address  the 
World's  convention.  It  was  perfectly 
natural  that  the  immense  concourse  of 
people  attending  the  convention  should 
forecast  the  character  of  the  lady  who 
should  address  them,  as  some  mascu- 
line heroine  who  could  yield  a  battle- 
axe  or  any  other  weapon  in  keeping 
with  their  own  distorted  notions  of 
Utah  life.  And  the  lady  herself,  at  the 
hour  that  she  had  to  appear,  could  but 
feel  the  extreme  tension  in  the  public 
mind;  for  the  morning  papers  were 
bristling  with  denunciations  of  Utah 
institutions.  There  was  an  ominous 
pause  in  the  mighty  thi-ong  when  it 
was  announced  by  the  presiding  officer 
that  the  lady  delegate  would  address 
them.  Soon  a  lady  appeared,  moving- 
forward  among  the  throng  on  the 
rostrum  and  taking  her  place  beside 
the  narrow  reading  desk.  What  an 
apparition!  It  was  not  a  feminine 
Amazon,  but  a  delicate,  refined  lady, 
ti-embling  slightly  under  the  scrutin- 
izing gaze  of  the  multitude,  yet  re- 
served, self-possessed,  dignified,  and 
as  pure  and  sweet  as  an  angel.  Her 
appearance  was  a  powerful  antithesis 
to  their  preconceived  impressions,  and 
the  change  of  feeling  in  the  audience 
was  almost  instantaneous.  The  lady's 
voice  began  its  utterances  on  a  scale  of 
greatly  tremulous  pathos,  and  without 
rising  into  high  pitch,  its  tenderness 
subdued  every  whisper  until  its  words 
reached  every  ear  in  the  auditory.  The 
tenor  of  the  address  was  what  might 
have  been  expected  by  Utah  people,  an 
orderly,  scholarly  presentation,  such  as 
would  serve  to  recite  facts  and  prin- 
ciples and  disarm  prejudice.  It  was 
not  the  words  themselves,  but  the 
gentle  spirit  that,  like  the  morning 
dawn,  went  with  the  words,  and  car- 
ried winning  grace  to  every  heart.  It 
was  wonderful  how  sympathies  were 
engendered    and    asperities    removed. 


When  the  lady  concluded,  after  half 
an  hour's  reading,  there  was  many  a 
moist  eye,  and  many  a  listener  felt 
thankful  that  this  lovely  apparition 
had  given  them  a  new,  more  refreshing 
and  more  kindly  impression  of  Utah 
people  and  institutions.  It  was  the 
mighty  force  of  the  gentle  sunlight 
that  unlocks  the  iceberg  from  its 
moorings  and  sets  it  afloat  upon  the 
broad  ocean." 

Mrs.  Richards  had  a  charming  per- 
sonality of  graciousness  and  dignity. 
Her  cheery  optimism  and  fine  sense  of 
humor  enabled  her  to  scatter  sunshine 
along  the  pathway  of  life.  She  had  a 
keen  appreciation  of  the  divine  law  of 
service  and  always  did  her  part,  with 
the  help  of  her  devoted  husband,  who 
was  proud  of  her  achievements.  They 
were  loving  companions  and  helped 
each  other  in  every  way  to  attain  suc- 
cess in  their  respective  lines  of  work. 
On  the  19th  day  of  August,  1929,  her 
sweet  spirit  took  its  departure  from 
her  mortal  body  and  went  to  its 
heavenly  home. 

It  is  remarkable  how  much  one  per- 
son can  accomplish  when  the  head  and 
heart  are  set  in  the  right  direction. 
Mrs.  Richards  was  a  leader  born,  and 
to  the  very  last  exhibited  character- 
istics of  leadership.  She  inspired  in 
the  minds  of  those  who  knew  her 
great  admiration  on  the  one  hand  and 
tender  devotion  on  the  other.  One  of 
the  choicest  of  women,  she  has  served 
her  family  and  friends,  her  State,  Na- 
tion, and  Church,  nobly  and  well.  She 
has  made  her  place  one  of  sacredness 
and  honor,  leaving  a  memory  that  is 
lovely  and  ideal. 

(Whitney's  History  of  Utah,  Vol.  4: 
604-606.  Relief  Society  Magazine,  Vol. 
16,  pp.  521-526.     Women  of  Deseret.) 

WOOD,  Edward  James,  3rd  pres- 
ident of  the  Alberta  Stake  of  Zion, 
in  Canada,  was  born  Oct.  27,  1866,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  j;he  son  of  Wil- 
liam Wood  and  Elizabeth  Gentry.  In 
1867,    as    a    member    of    his    father's 


112 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


family,  he  went  on  the  Dixie  mission. 
After  his  father's  release  from  that 
mission  the  family  lived  for  a  short 
time  at  Meadow  Valley  and  Panaca, 
Nevada,  and  in  Beaver,  Utah.  About 
1872  the  family  moved  back  to  Salt 
Lake  City  and  located  in  the  11th 
Ward;  later  in  the  19th  Ward.  His 
home  as  a  boy  was  for  some  time  in 
a  part  of  the  "Old  Bath  House."  About 
1877  the  family  moved  one  block  east, 
where  his  father  built  "Cave  Cottage," 
in  1878.  Here  Edward's  boyhood  days 
were  mostly  spent  and  he  was  edu- 
cated in  the  public  schools  and  he 
also  attended  Prof.  Regars'  private 
school.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  20, 
1875,  in  the  "Old  Bath  House,"  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  at  the  age  of  11 
and  a  Priest  when  15  years  old. 
While  living  in  "Cave  Cottage"  he 
worked  with  his  father  in  the  butcher 
business  and  had  charge  of  a  small 
shop  near  the  old  Utah  Central  Rail- 
road corner.  He  took  an  active  part 
in  auxiliary  work,  was  manager  of 
the  19th  Ward  Dramatic  Club,  and 
captain  of  the  "Star  B.  B.  Club."  At 
18  years  of  age  he  worked  in  Judge 
Van  Zile's  law  office  and  also  attended 
the  Deseret  University.  At  19  he 
worked  in  the  Pacific  Express  office 
and  at  20  began  a  service  of  many 
years  in  the  Dinwoodey  Furniture  Com- 
pany. He  was  ordained  an  Elder  and 
later  (Sept.  13,  1888)  a  Seventy.  In 
1888-1892  he  filled  a  mission  to  Samoa 
and,  together  with  Bro.  and  Sister 
Dean,  became  a  pioneer  in  opening  up 
the  work  of  the  Lord  on  that  group. 
During  his  mission  he  had  many 
thrilling  experiences  on  sea  and  land 
and  witnessed  many  manifestations  of 
the  power  of  God.  He  learned  to  love 
the  natives  of  the  islands  and  baptized 
many  of  them  into  the  Church.  He 
also  did  some  translating,  and  com- 
posed a  number  of  hymns.  Returning 
home  in  1892  he  stopped  en  route  in 
Hawaii,  where  he  visited  places  of 
interest.  In  18C2  (Sept.  7th),  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Ann  Solomon  and  made  his 
home    in   the   22nd    Ward,   where    he 


acted  as  counselor  in  the  ward  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  In  1893  he  moved  to  Eureka, 
Juab  Co.,  Utah,  where  he  engaged  in 
the  butcher  business.  There  he  acted 
as  superintendent  of  the  ward  Sunday 
school  and  as  president  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  In  the  fall  of  189G  he  was 
called  on  another  mission  to  Samoa, 
this  time  to  preside  over  the  mission. 
He  traveled  a  great  deal  on  the 
islands,  wrote  several  tracts  which  he 
compiled  into  a  small  volume,  and 
also  translated  parts  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon  for  Sunday  school  purposes. 
On  his  return  home  in  1899  he  visited, 
en  route,  the  Friendly  Islands,  New 
Zealand,  Australia,  Fiji,  Hawaii,  etc., 
and  landed  in  America  at  Vancouver, 
B.  C.  After  his  return  home  he  again 
became  an  active  worker  in  the  aux- 
iliary organizations,  and  in  ward 
teaching,  and  while  residing  for  a 
short  time  in  the  Sugar  House  Ward, 
he  acted  as  Sunday  school  superin- 
tendent. In  1900,  he  was  chosen  as 
a  counselor  to  Bishop  Apollos  G. 
Driggs  of  the  Sugar  House  Wai'd  and 
later  acted  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop 
Atwood  of  the  Salt  Lake  City  13th 
Ward.  In  November,  1901,  he  moved 
to  Cardston,  Alberta,  Canada,  where 
he  acted  as  ward  Sunday  school  super- 
intendent, and  in  1902  was  appointed 
an  alternate  member  of  the  Alberta 
Stake  High  Council.  When  Pres. 
Charles  O.  Card  was  released  on  ac- 
count of  sickness  and  Heber  S.  Allen 
succeeded  him  as  president  of  the 
Alberta  Stake,  Bro.  Wood  was  chosen 
as  one  of  the  counselors  in  the  stake 
presidency.  In  September,  1903,  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  several  of  the 
Apostles  visited  Canada  and  organized 
the  Taylor  Stake  of  Zion,  with  Bro. 
Allen  as  stake  president,  and  Bro. 
Wood  was  then  chosen  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Alberta  Stake  of 
Zion  with  Thomas  Duce  and  Stirling 
Williams  as  counselors.  Bro.  Wood 
still  holds  this  position.  When  the 
Cardston  Temple  was  dedicated  Aug. 
26,  1923,  he  was  chosen  as  president 
of  the  Temple,  which  position  he  still 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


113 


occupies.  Pres.  Wood's  marriage  has 
been  blessed  with  eight  children, 
namely,  Glen,  Fern,  Ivy,  Myrtle, 
Forest,  Olive,  Dale  and  Vi.  In  1909 
he  went  on  a  business  trip  to  England, 
and  he  also  visited  many  places  of  in- 
terest on  the  continent.  In  1916  he  was 
called  to  make  a  third  trip  to  Samoa 
to  look  into  the  advisability  of  organiz- 
ing the  Tongan  Mission,  which  was 
done  in  February,  1917,  by  setting 
apart  Elder  Willard  L.  Smith  and  his 
wife  Jeanette,  who  were  laboring  mis- 
sionaries on  Samoa  at  the  time,  to 
go  to  Tonga  and  reopen  that  mission. 
Bro.  Wood  returned  home  from  his 
third  mission  to  Samoa  in  May,  1917. 
He  is  the  first  Elder  of  the  Church  to 
fill  three  missions  to  Samoa. 

WRIGHT,  Elias  Smith,  an  active 
Elder  in  the  Ensign  Stake  of  Zion,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  July  23, 
1860,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of    Judge    Jonathan    C.    Wright    and 


Caroline  Olsen.  He  was  a  direct  de- 
scendent  of  Daniel  Shead  who  faith- 
fully served  the  colonists  during  the 
revolutionary  war  with  the  New 
Hampshire  forces  under  the  command 
of  Col.  Alexander  Schammel.  Bro. 
Wright   was    educated   in   the   public 


schools  of  Brigham  City,  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah  (then  designated  the  Uni- 
versity of  Deseret)  and  was  later 
graduated  from  the  Medical  School  of 
the  New  York  University  with  the 
degree  of  M.  D.  in  1890.  After  his 
graduation  he  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  he  practiced  surgery  and 
medicine  until  his  death.  He  was  a 
leader  in  his  chosen  pi*ofession,  his 
associates  holding  him  in  high  esteem 
as  evidenced  by  his  election  to  serve 
as  president  of  the  Salt  Lake  County 
Medical  Society  and  the  Utah  State 
Medical  Association  respectively.  He 
was  the  surgeon-general  of  the  Utah 
State  National  Guard  during  the  en- 
cumbency  of  Gov.  Wm.  Spry  of  Utah. 
He  also  served  as  county  physician  of 
Salt  Lake  County  for  a  number  of 
years.  He  was  a  charter  member  of 
the  Utah  Society  of  the  Sons  of  the 
American  Revolution  and  a  short  time 
prior  to  his  demise  he  was  elected  an 
honorary  vice-president  of  the  society; 
during  the  year  1925  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  organization. 

Being  born  of  Latter-day  Saint 
parents  he  was  baptized  Feb.  28, 
1869,  by  William  Neeley,  and  was 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest,  Elder  and 
Seventy.  While  serving  as  an  L.  D.  S. 
missionary  in  the  Southern  States  ir 
1886-1888,  he,  together  with  four  other 
Elders,  was  dragged  from  his  bed  and 
fearfully  beaten  by  a  mob  near  Bell's 
Station,  Tennessee,  for  preaching  the 
gospel.  In  1889  (April  4th)  Dr.  Wright 
married  Elizabeth  Sophia  Richards, 
daughter  of  Samuel  W.  Richards  and 
Helena  Robinson,  in  the  Logan  Tem- 
ple. This  union  was  blessed  with  five 
children,  namely,  Elias  Spencer,  Verda, 
Virginia,  Helen  and  Afton. 

Dr.  Wright  was  a  man  of  even  tem- 
per, ever  true  and  loyal  to  his  friends 
and  tolerant  of  the  views  of  those  who 
disagreed  with  him.  His  love  of 
country  and  his  citizenship  in  this 
great  nation  were  emphasized  through 
his  activities  during  all  his  life.    His 


Vol.  IV.  No.  8 


February  22,  1936 


114 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


demise  occun'ed  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Feb.  14,  1928,  but  he  will  live  long  in 
the  memory  of  his  many  friends  for 
his  generous  service  to  the  needy  and 
his  willingness  to  answer  every  call 
made  upon  him  to  relieve  suffering 
humanity. 

ANDERSON,  Hyrum  Albert,  third 
Bishop  of  the  Lehi  1st  Ward,  Lehi 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
March  9,  1881,  at  Lehi,  Utah  County, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Andrew  R.  Anderson 
and  Nielsine  Anderson.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  12,  1889,  by  George  Comer, 
and  spent  his  early  life  in  Lehi  at- 
tending grade  schools  and  high  school. 
He  was  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest  and 
Elder.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Jan.  23,  1902,  and  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  23,  1928,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun.  When  still  quite  young  he 
acted  as  president  of  a  Priests'  quorum 
and  later  as  president  of  an  Elders' 
quorum.  For  8  years  he  acted  as  a 
president  of  the  68th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty, the  last  five  years  as  senior  presi- 
dent. He  also  acted  as  president  of 
the  Lehi  3rd  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  L  A.  for 
two  years  and  as  superintendent  of 
the  Lehi  1st  Ward  Sunday  School  for 
12  years.  In  1902-1905,  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Norway.  In  1906  (Jan. 
30)  he  married  Mary  Magdalene 
Whipple,  which  union  has  been  blessed 
with  four  children,  namely,  Hyrum 
Dale,  Phillis,  Fay,  and  May  Beth. 

AUSTIN,  John,  a  pioneer  settler  of 
Lehi,  Utah,  was  born  Dec.  3,  1822,  at 
Studham,  Bedfordshire,  England,  the 
third  child  of  Joseph  Austin  and  Ann 
Mills.  He  was  early  taught  to  be 
industrious  and  frugal,  and  on  March 
20,  1847,  he  married  Emma  Grace, 
daughter  of  Thomas  Grace  and  Mary 
Jayce,  of  Whipsnade  in  Bedfordshire. 
After  residing  a  short  time  in  Whip- 
snade, the  young  couple  moved  to 
Kinsmouth,  Hartfordshire,  and  there 
the  young  wife  became  a  convert  to  the 
restored   gospel,   being   baptized   Jan. 


5,  1850.  On  the  same  date,  two  years 
later,  John  Austin  was  baptized.  The 
young  couple  lived  quiet,  industrious 
lives,  raised  a  large  family  and  kept 
out  of  debt,  but  always  before  them 
was  the  hope  that  some  day  they  might 
gather  with  the  saints  in  Zion.  When 
the  family  numbered  eleven  children, 
they  felt  that  their  hopes  could  never 
be  realized,  so  they  decided  to  spend 
the  little   money  saved  towards  their 


emigration  in  sending  their  oldest 
daughter  (Harriet),  18  years  of  age, 
and  their  oldest  son  (George),  17  years 
old,  to  Utah,  that  the  family  would  at 
least  be  represented  among  the  saints 
there.  These  young  people  left  Lon- 
don, England,  May  5,  1866,  on  the  ship 
"Caroline"  in  a  company  of  389  emi- 
grating Saints,  and  arrived  in  New 
York,  June  11th.  Thence  the  company 
proceeded  by  rail  and  river  steamers 
to  Wyoming,  Neb.,  the  outfitting  place 
for  the  L.  D.  S.  emigration  that  year. 
Harriet  and  George  crossed  the  plains 
in  Wm.  Henry  Chipman's  train  and 
settled  in  Lehi,  Utah,  where  their 
father's  brother,  George,  already  re- 
sided. In  1868,  Sister  Austin  read  in 
the  "Millennial  Star"  that  part  of  the 
ship  "Minnesota"  had  been  chartered 
for  the  benefit  of  saints  who  expected 
to   emigrate   and   felt  impressed  that 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


115 


she  and  her  husband  and  family  would 
go  in  that  ship,  and  so  commenced  to 
make  preparations  for  the  voyage. 
Just  two  weeks  before  the  ship  sailed, 
Bro.  Bartel  Turner,  a  neighbor,  offered 
to  lend  Bi-o.  Austin  the  money  to  emi- 
grate his  entire  family.  At  first  Bro. 
Austin  hesitated  to  accept  this  gener- 
ous offer,  fearing  that  he  might  never 
be  able  to  repay  the  loan,  but  finally 
became  convinced  that  the  prayers  of 
himself  and  family  had  previously  been 
answered  in  a  miraculous  way,  and 
that  they  might  trust  their  Heavenly 
Father  to  aid  them  in  paying  off  the 
debt.  So  Bro.  and  Sister  Austin  with 
their  ten  children  sailed  from  Liver- 
pool, England,  June  22,  1868,  on  the 
ship  "Minnesota"  which  arrived  in 
New  York,  July  12th.  Thence  they 
proceeded  by  rail  to  Laramie,  Wyo- 
ming, where  they  were  met  by  Capt. 
Joseph  S.  Rawlins  with  a  mule  train 
with  which  they  made  the  journey  to 
Salt  Lake  City  and  then  proceeded  to 
Lehi,  where  they  established  a  perma- 
nent home.  At  this  time  the  Union 
Pacific  Railroad  was  nearing  its  com- 
pletion and  men  were  being  hired  for 
grading,  etc.,  so  Bro.  Austin  with  his 
two  oldest  boys  obtained  work,  and 
at  the  end  of  that  season  they  were 
enabled  to  pay  their  friends  the  money 
borrowed  for  their  emigration.  The 
following  year  Bro.  Austin  took  up 
farming  land  at  Lehi  and  later  he  and 
his  sons  were  among  the  first  to  take 
up  land  on  the  bench  north  of  Lehi, 
under  the  North  Bench  Ditch.  The 
father  and  sons  were  eminently  suc- 
cessful as  tillers  of  the  soil,  and  when 
the  sugar  factory  was  located  at  Lehi, 
the  Austin  brothers  were  among  the 
foremost  to  bring  about  the  successful 
cultivation  of  the  sugar  beet.  As  a  con- 
sequence a  number  of  the  sons  of  John 
Austin  became  superintendents  of  ag- 
riculture at  different  factories  of  the 
Utah-Idaho  Sugar  Company,  one, 
George,  being  the  general  superintend- 
ent of  agriculture  over  all  the  factories 
of  the  company,  a  position  later  occu- 


pied by  his  younger  brother  Mark  at 
a  time  when  the  Utah-Idaho  Sugar 
Company  was  one  of  the  most  import- 
ant corporations  in  the  West. 

Bro.  Austin's  loving  wife  and  faith- 
ful companion  during  his  days  of  ad- 
versity died  in  1893,  aged  66  years, 
and  afterwards  Bro.  Austin  married 
Elizabeth  Pead,  who  preceded  him 
just  a  few  days  to  the  Great  Beyond. 
Bro.  Austin  died  Feb.  13,  1907,  as 
president  of  the  High  Priests  of  Lehi, 
He  was  dearly  beloved  and  respected 
by  all  and  left  a  family  which  is  noted 
for  thrift,  industry  and  business  saga- 
city, members  of  which  are  filling  posi- 
tions of  trust  and  honor  both  in  Church 
and  State. 

BARNES,  Arthur  Franklin,  jun., 
third  Bishop  of  Richards  Ward,  Gran- 
ite Stake,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  13,  1889,  in  the  17th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ar- 
thur Franklin  Barnes  and  Elizabeth 
Harriet  Sansom.  He  was  raised  and 
educated  in  Salt  Lake  City,  obtaining 
a  good  high  school  education  at  the 
L.  D.  S.  College  in  Salt  Lake  City.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  2,  1897,  by  his  fa- 
ther, and  was  ordained  a  Deacon  when 
quite  young.  He  was  ordained  a  Priest, 
Nov.  12,  1906,  by  Bishop  Franklin  S. 
Tingey.  Later  (Feb.  23,  1909)  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Wm.  F.  Lang- 
ton,  and  was  ordained  a  Seventy,  Jan. 
22,  1912,  by  Joseph  W.  McMurrin.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  Switzerland  and 
Germany  in  1909-1911,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  the  Zurich,  Breslau,  and 
Hannover  conferences.  In  1914  (Sept. 
24)  he  married  Millie  Tingey,  daugh- 
ter of  Bishop  Franklin  S.  Tingey  of 
the  17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  Five 
children  have  blessed  this  marriage, 
namely,  Mildred  Edna,  John  Richard, 
Ruth  Elizabeth,  Robert  Franklin,  and 
Edward  Dale.  Brother  Barnes  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
Apostle  George  Albert  Smith  Dec.  28, 
1928,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Richards  Ward,  which  position  he 
held  until  July  1,  1935,  when  he  was 


116 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


released  on  account  of  his  moving  to 
another  ward.  Prior  to  his  ordination 
as  Bishop  he  acted  as  a  counselor  in 
the  LeGrand  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
(1915)  and  later  (1924;1927)  assistant 
superintendent  in  the  Richards  Ward 
Sunday  School  until  Sept.  18,  1927, 
when  he  was  made  superintendent  of 
said  school,  which  at  that  time  was  the 
largest  Sunday  School  in  the  Chui'ch, 
having  a  membership  of  over  1,000. 
He  held  this  office  until  he  was  chosen 
as  Bishop.  He  is  now  (1936)  assistant^ 
superintendent  of  the  Yale  Ward  Sun- 
day School.  Bishop  Barnes  worked  in 
the  Deseret  National  Bank  for  ten 
years,  starting  as  a  messenger,  and 
was  paying  teller  when  he  left  in  May, 
1919,  to  become  associated  with  Ed- 
ward L.  Burton  &  Company,  invest- 
ment bankers  (SaFt  Lake  City),  of 
which  he  is  secretary-treasurer.  Since 
leaving  high  school.  Bishop  Barnes  has 
been  active  in  the  banking  and  finan- 
cial field.  He  is  a  director  or  officer 
of  several  important  business  institu- 
tions. 

BARNES,  Harold  Sansom,  fourth 
Bishop  of  Wasatch  Ward,  Granite 
Stake,  was  born  Feb.  14,  1895,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Arthur  F.  Barnes  and  Elizabeth  H. 
Sansom.  He  was  baptized  May  28, 
1903,  by  John  W.  Grice  and  educated 
in  the  public  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
the  L.  D.  S.  High  School  and  the  L. 
D.  S.  Business  College  and  was  award- 
ed the  Heber  J.  Grant  scholarship  at 
the  latter  institution  in  1911.  Being 
ordained  to  offices  in  the  Aaronic 
Priesthood,  he  served  in  an  official 
capacity  in  each,  was  later  ordained  an 
Elder  and  was  ordained  a  Seventy, 
March  31,  1919,  by  Robert  S.  Camp- 
bell. In  his  youth  he  served  in  the 
superintendency  of  the  Sunday  School 
and  in  the  presidency  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  in  the  17th  Ward.  From  1914  to 
1917  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  presiding  part  of  the  time  over 
the  Massachusetts  Conference.    Orig- 


inally his  call  was  to  the  South  Afri- 
can Mission  but  his  field  of  labor  was 
changed  on  account  of  the  World  war. 
On  Jan.  1,  1918,  Elder  Barnes  mar- 


ried Allie  Josephine  Rasmussen  of 
Redmond,  Utah;  this  mari'iage  has 
been  blessed  with  four  children,  name- 
ly, Harold  Sansom,  Barbara  Josephine, 
Clifford  Rasmussen  and  Aleene  Merle. 
After  his  marriage  Brother  Barnes 
moved  to  the  Wasatch  Ward  of  the 
Granite  Stake,  where  he  acted  as  pres- 
ident of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  chairman  of 
Genealogical  Committee,  chairman  of 
Recreational  Committee  and  in  other 
capacities.  After  being  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Joseph  F.  Smith  he 
was  set  apart  May  24,  1924,  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Isaac  C.  Thunell  of 
the  Wasatch  Ward  and  held  this  po- 
sition until  1927  when  the  bishopric 
was  reorganized.  On  May  4,  1931,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  James  E. 
Talmage  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Wasatch  Ward,  which  position  he 
held  until  1935.  During  his  term  of 
office  the  debt  on  the  ward  chapel  was 
paid  and  the  chapel  dedicated. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


117 


After  leaving  school  Brother  Barnes 
worked  in  a  law  office  and  in  the  ac- 
counting department  of  the  Utah  Pow- 
er &  Light  Company  until  called  on  a 
mission.  After  his  retui-n  he  was  ap- 
pointed clerk  of  the  newly  created 
Public  Utilities  Commission  of  Utah 
and  later  served  as  secretary  of  that 
organization.  In  1921  he  entered  the 
employ  of  the  Inter-Mountain  Life  In- 
surance Co.,  becoming  a  director  and 
manager  of  the  Investment  Depart- 
ment. Subsequently  he  had  charge  of 
the  local  properties  of  the  California- 
Western  States  Life,  and  on  April  1, 
1933,  was  appointed  superintendent  of 
the  Dr.  W.  H.  Groves  L.  D.  S.  Hos- 
pital, which  position  he  still  holds.  At 
present  he  is  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Highland  Stake. 

BARRETT,  Georgianna  Pacific,  was 

born  on  board  the  ship  "Brooklyn"  on 
the  Pacific  Ocean,  June  14,  1846,  one 
week  before  the  historical  vessel 
touched  at  the  Hawaiian  Islands.  She 
was  the  daughter  of  John  R.  Robbins 
and  Phebe  Ann  Wright.  It  was  the 
express  wish  of  the  captain  that  she 
be  named  Helena  Brooklyn  Pacific,  the 
first  name  being  that  of  the  captain's 
wife,  but  the  little  lady  escaped  with 
the  above  name.  Her  parents  had 
joined  the  Church  in  New  Jersey  in 
1839  and  after  enduring  many  of  the 
trials  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  saints 
in  Nauvoo,  the  Robbins  family  were 
advised  by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
to  return  to  their  home  in  New  Jersey 
on  account  of  their  poor  health.  In 
1846,  when  it  was  understood  that 
some  of  the  saints  in  the  Atlantic 
States  would  migrate  overland  to  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  Samuel  Brannan, 
who  presided  over  the  saints  in  the  East 
at  that  time,  chartered  the  ship  "Brook- 
lyn" to  take  a  company  of  saints 
around  Cape  Horn  to  California  to 
unite  with  their  co-religionists  where 
and  when  a  permanent  location  should 
be  selected  by  the  leaders  of  the  Church 
for  the  saints  to  gather.  During  this 
long    ocean    voyage    Bro.    and    Sister 


Robbins  lost  two  little  sons  by  death 
and  the  daughter,  Georgianna,  was 
born.  After  remaining  in  California 
four  years,  the  family  returned  east 
for  a  time.  The  route  taken,  via  the 
Isthmus  of  Panama,  was  one  of  con- 
siderable adventure,  little  Georgianna 
being  carried  across  the  isthmus  on  the 
back  of  a  native,  while  her  mother  and 
baby   sister   Emma   rode   a   hammock, 


also  carried  by  natives.  After  resid- 
ing for  a  short  time  in  New  Jersey, 
the  family  came  to  Utah  in  1853  and 
settled  in  the  17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  Georgianna  completed  her 
education  in  the  schools  and,  later,  to- 
gether with  her  sister  Emma,  taught 
school.  In  1870  Georgianna  married 
Dr.  Clarence  Barrett  in  the  Endow- 
ment House  in  Salt  Lake  City.  This 
union  was  blessed  with  four  children, 
namely,  Ellen  Louisa  Barrett,  born 
Jan.  14,  1871,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
and  married  Caleb  E.  Summerhays  in 
1893;  John  R.  Barrett,  who  died  young; 
Isabella  Barrett,  who  was  born  Dec. 
6,  1874,  and  married  Joseph  Parley 
White,  and  Daisy  Barrett,  who  died 
young.  Mrs.  Barrett  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  April  10,  1929.  She  was  survived 
by  her  two  daughters,  Mrs.  Sumrier- 
hays,  and  Mrs.  White,  two  grand- 
children, namely,  Dr.  V.  P.  White  and 


118 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Dr.  L.  S.  White,  four  great-grandchil- 
dren and  a  niece,  Mrs.  David  O. 
McKay. 

BARTON,  Walter  K.,  second  presi- 
dent of  the  Franklin  Stake  of  Zion, 
Franklin  Co.,  Idaho,  was  born  Dec.  14, 
1877,  at  Sterling,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Walter  Kilshaw  Barton  and 
Susan  Angeline  Petty.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  1,  1886,  by  John  L.  Peacock, 
and  ordained  a  Deacon  at  Sterling, 
but  lived  at  the  mines  until  he  was 
grown.  After  receiving  a  common 
school  education,  he  became  a  student 
in  the  commercial  department  of  the 


Snow  Normal  College  at  Ephraim, 
Utah,  graduating  from  the  commercial 
department  in  1901  and  from  the 
normal  training  department  of  that 
institution  in  1903. 

He  became  a  teacher  in  the  Oneida 
Academy  at  Preston,  Idaho,  acting  in 
that  capacity  from  1903  to  1913  and 
from  1915  to  1918.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Joseph  S.  Geddes  and  in 
1906  (June  27th)  he  married  Jeanette 
M.  Smith,  which  union  has  been  blessed 
with  ten  children,  namely,  Flora,  Glenn 
S.,  Louise,  Walter  Kenneth,  Ruth,  Cliff 
Smith,  Donna,  Vaunna,  Jeanette  Marie 
and  Helen  Kay.  Elder  Barton  was  a 
member  of  the  Oneida  Stake  Sunday 


School  Board  from  1904  to  1906  and 
was  assistant  superintendent  of  Reli- 
gion Classes  in  the  Stake  in  1906  and 
1907.  From  1907  to  1921  he  was  sec- 
retary-treasurer of  the  Oneida  Acad- 
emy Board  of  Education.  From  1906 
to  1907  he  acted  as  clerk  of  the  Preston 
First  Ward,  as  assistant  stake  clerk 
of  the  Oneida  Stake  from  May  to 
September,  1907,  and  as  stake  clerk 
from  1907  to  1920.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Dec.  30,  1911,  and  on 
June  6,  1920,  when  the  Oneida  Stake 
was  divided  and  the  Franklin  Stake 
organized,  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  new 
Stake,  which  position  he  held  until 
June  25,  1922,  when  he  was  promoted 
to  the  position  of  first  counselor,  and 
on  Nov.  27,  1927,  he  succeeded  Samuel 
W.  Parkinson  as  president  of  the 
Franklin  Stake.  Besides  his  ecclesias- 
tical activities  Pres.  Barton  has  held  a 
number  of  civil  offices  in  which  he  dis- 
played his  competency,  dilligence  and 
honesty  in  dealing  with  public  affairs. 
He  served  on  the  Preston  City  school 
board  for  two  terms  and  as  City  Treas- 
urer of  Preston  for  eighteen  years.  In 
June,  1927,  he  was  appointed  secre- 
tary-treasurer of  the  Preston  Whitney 
Irrigation  Company,  which  position  he 
now  holds.  From  1913  to  1916  he  was 
engaged  in  mercantile  business  in 
Preston,  which  occupation  he  again  re- 
sumed in  1919.  On  April  26,  1936, 
the  Preston  Region  of  the  Church 
Security  Program  was  organized, 
which  includes  the  Franklin,  Oneida, 
Bannock,  Idaho  and  Montpelier  stakes 
of  Zion.  Of  this  important  organiza- 
tion Pres.  Barton  was  appointed  chair- 
man. 

BEESLEY,  Wilford  Angus,  presi- 
dent of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  born  Aug.  26,  1883,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Ebenezer  Beesley 
and  Annie  Frewin  Buckeridge.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  1,  1891,  by  John  T. 
Thorup  and  ordained  successively  to 
the    offices    of    Deacon,    Teacher    and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


119 


Priest.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
March  28,  1904,  by  Alfred  Winn  and  a 
Seventy,  May  1,  1911,  by  J.  Golden 
Kimball.  On  May  14,  1920,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  James  E. 
Talmage.  From  April,  1904,  to  July, 
1906,  Elder  Beesley  filled  a  mission  to 
England,  laboring  as  a  traveling  Elder 
and  also  as  secretary  of  the  London 
Conference.      Upon    his    return    from 


that  mission  he  located  for  a  time  in 
Sugar  City,  Idaho,  where  he  became 
associated  with  the  Utah-Idaho  Sugar 
Company  as  book-keeper  at  the  fac- 
tory. While  there  he  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Fremont  Stake  Sunday 
School  Board.  After  his  return  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  he  served  as  a  member 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Sunday  School 
Board  for  a  short  time,  and  in  1909 
was  chosen  as  superintendent  of  the 
22nd  Ward  Sunday  School.  Later  he 
served  as  a  counselor,  and  still  later  as 
president  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.,  also  as  a  member  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  High  Council,  and  as 
second  counselor  to  Stake  President 
Nephi  L.  Morris.  On  June  17,  1929,  he 
succeeded  Elder  Morris  as  president  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  which 
position    he   still   holds. 

President  Beesley   received  a  High 
School  education,  and  after  his  gradu- 


ation took  advantage  of  the  extension 
courses  offered,  specializing  in  ac- 
counting, and  in  August,  1914,  he 
passed  the  state  examination  and  be- 
came a  certified  public  accountant.  In 
May,  1923,  he  was  admitted  to  mem- 
bership in  the  American  Institute  of 
Accountants  and  became  president  of 
the  Utah  Association  of  Certified  Ac- 
countants. 

On  June  27, 1907,  Elder  Beesley  mar- 
ried Emma  Sarah  Frewin,  daughter 
of  Arthur  Frewin  and  Emma  Lester, 
born  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  1885.  She 
died  in  Salt  Lake  City  in  1919,  and  on 
April  27,  1921,  he  married  Evangeline 
K.  Thomas,  daughter  of  Moroni  J. 
Thomas  and  Agnes  Olsen,  born  Feb. 
11,  1894.  Four  children  have  blessed 
this  union,  namely,  Beverly,  Virginia, 
Wilford  Angus,  jun.,  and  Garratt 
Thomas.  President  Beesley's  untiring 
devotion  to  the  work  of  the  Lord  and 
his  sympathetic  interest  in  all  who 
labor  under  his  direction  have  won  for 
him  the  loyal  support  and  high  esteem 
of  all  who  are  privileged  to  be  asso- 
ciated with  him  in  an  ecclesiastical  or 
civil  capacity. 

BROWN,  James  Cross,  pioneer,  mis- 
sionary and  pony  express  rider,  was 
born  March  3,  1837,  in  Manchester, 
England,  a  son  of  William  Brown  and 
Jane  Hardman  Brown.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1845  by  Moses  Martin.  On 
Feb.  10,  1852,  when  14  years  old,  he 
sailed  from  Liverpool,  England,  on  the 
ship  "Ellen  Marie",  together  with  his 
mother,  brother  John  Bradford  and 
sister  Elizabeth,  Isaac  C.  Haight  being 
leader  of  the  company.  The  emigrants 
landed  in  New  Orleans,  April  6,  1852, 
and  the  Brown  family  crossed  the 
plains  in  Capt.  Abraham  Smoot's  com- 
pany, ari'iving  in  the  Valley  August 
26,  1852. 

Brother  Brown  served  on  the  Pony 
Express  division  that  went  west  from 
Salt  Lake  City,  thx-ough  old  Camp 
Floyd,  Rush  Valley,  the  Deep  Creek 
section,  Ruby  Valley  to  Smith  Creek, 


120 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


where  the  next  division  began.  This 
route  was  under  the  command  of 
Major  Howard  Egan,  who  had  under 
his  command  such  men  as  Peter  Niece, 
Washington  Perkins  and  Bill  Egan. 

Those  were  the  days  when  Indians 
were  continually  on  the  warpath.  They 
seemed  to  consider  the  Pony  Express 
riders  their  special  targets,  and  by 
their  treacherous  attacks  many  lives 
and  pouches  of  mail  were  lost  and  sta- 
tions burned. 


Bro.  Brown  was  known  among  his 
Pony  Express  riders  as  "Little  Jim," 
because  of  his  small  stature.  Once, 
Little  Jim,  taking  a  short  cut,  rode 
right  into  a  group  of  hostile  Indians, 
who  surrounded  him  and  demanded 
that  he  give  them  a  note,  to  the  station 
master,  for  provisions.  He  stalled  for 
time  with  various  excuses;  he  had  no 
paper;  they  handed  him  a  piece  of 
wrapping  paper;  he  had  no  pencil;  they 
handed  him  a  leaden  bullet.  Having 
no  further  excuses,  he  began  to  write, 
which  so  interested  his  captors  that 
they  relaxed  their  watchfulness  and 
let  go  of  their  hold  on  the  stirrups  and 
reins.  With  a  yell.  Little  Jim  stuck 
spurs  into  his  pony  and  rode  away, 
leaving  half  of  the  warriors  on  the 
ground,  bowled  there  by  the  pony's 
leap. 


The  Indians  pursued  in  haste,  but 
he  out-rode  them  and  reached  the  next 
station  with  no  other  damage  than  an 
arrow  in  the  calf  of  his  leg. 

It  was  the  Pony  Express  that  re- 
layed the  news  of  President  Lincoln's 
first  election  fi-om  the  Missouri  river 
to  the  Pacific  Coast,  Little  Jim  riding 
the  Deep  Creek  section  which  carried 
the  news.  He  took  the  mail  pouch 
from  the  incoming  rider.  Bill  Fisher, 
and  dashed  west  over  forty-five  miles 
of  his  division.  At  the  end  of  the  ride, 
instead  of  a  warm  station,  a  husky 
rider  and  fresh  pony  to  carry  on,  he 
came  upon  four  bodies,  bullet-pierced 
and  scalped,  and  the  station  burned 
to  ashes. 

There  was  no  time  to  wait — weary 
horse  and  weary  rider  must  carry  on — 
forty-five  more  miles  to  ride — fired  on 
along  the  way  by  ambushed  savages. 
Reaching  the  next  station  he  fell  from 
his  staggering  pony,  with  three  ar- 
rows in  his  back  and  a  bullet  wound 
in  his  leg.  Instantly  his  successor 
grabbed  the  mail  pouch,  mounted  a 
fresh  pony  and  was  off.  The  mail  must 
go  through.  Thi-ee  different  times  he 
had  his  pony  shot  from  under  him  and 
he  was  forced  to  carry  the  mail  to  the 
station.  Brother  Brown  later  took  part 
in  the  Black  Hawk  war  and  other 
Indian  troubles  in  the  southern  part 
of  Utah.  He  became  personally  ac- 
quainted with  Indian  Chief  Black 
Hawk,  who  often  visited  the  Brown 
home. 

When  news  was  received  that  Johns- 
ton's army  was  approaching  the  Val- 
ley, he  was  among  those  sent  out  to 
Echo  Canyon  to  meet  the  invaders. 
For  a  short  time  he  drove  the  stage 
coach  for  Wm.  F.  Cody  (Buffalo  Bill). 
He  was  in  the  crowd  that  witnessed  the 
driving  of  the  Golden  Spike  at  Promon- 
tory Point,  Utah,  when  the  Union 
Pacific  and  Oregon  Short  Lines  joined 
on  May  10,  1869.  He  also  hauled  rocks 
from  Little  Cottonwood  Canyon  for 
the  foundation  of  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


121 


James  C.  Brown  was  ordained  a 
teacher  in  1852  by  Joseph  L.  Heywood, 
In  1867  he  met  Miss  Ellen  John,  re- 
cently of  Wales,  and  in  November, 
1869,  they  were  wed  in  the  Endow- 
ment House. 

In  1873  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  James  Livingston.  In  1895-1898 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  British  Isles, 
laboring  in  the  Welsh  and  Manchester 
conferences.  On  this  mission  he  had 
the  opportunity  to  gather  his  wife's 
genealogy.  Thus  he  again  visited  the 
home  he  had  left  so  many  years  before. 
He  was  honorably  released  from  his 
mission,  returning  to  Utah  in  April, 
1898. 

Elder  Brown  held  the  office  of 
a  High  Priest  when  he  died  in  Sandy, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  Dec.  27,  1904. 

BURTON,  James  Edward,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Ogden  Nineteenth  Ward, 
Weber  Stake,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born  April  12,  1882,  in  Wallsend,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  George  B.  Burton, 
and  Anna  Shipley. 

As  an  infant  he  emigrated  from 
England  in  1882,  together  with  his 
parents,  and  located  at  or  near  Og- 
den, where  he  was  raised  and  received 
a  common  school  education.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  9,  1891,  by  George  H. 
Butler,  and  from  his  earliest  youth  he 
took  an  active  part  in  the  Church. 
While  still  quite  young,  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  office  of  Deacon  and  la- 
ter ordained  an  Elder,  by  Mathias 
Tanner. 

After  being  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Joseph  Ririe,  May  9,  1920,  he  labored 
as  a  home  missionary  in  Weber  Stake 
for  two  terms  of  two  years  each,  the 
first  term  in  1921-1923  and  the  second 
term  1923-1926.  While  thus  engaged 
he  spent  most  of  his  time  among  non- 
Mormons,  among  whom  he  made  seven 
new  convei'ts,  whom  he  baptized  into 
the  Church. 

After  laboring  as  a  Ward  Teacher 
for  a  number  of  years,  he  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest,  November  7,  1927, 


by  Christian  J.  Jensen,  after  which 
he  acted  as  a  counselor  to  Bishop 
Stuart  until  Oct.  20,  1930,  when  he  was 
chosen  and  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden  19th  Ward,  which  position  he 
still   occupies. 

In  1903  (June  5)  he  married  Jean 
Gait,  which  union  has  been  blessed 
with  two  children,  Jessie  and  Janell. 
His  daughter  Jessie  filled  a  mission 
to  California  in  1928-1930. 

Bishop  Burton  is  a  machinist  by 
avocation  and  is  at  present  employed 
as  a  foreman  in  the  Southern  Pacific 
Railroad  Shops  at  Ogden.  He  has  been 
quite  successful  in  financial  affairs  and 
has  taken  an  active  part  in  erecting  a 
meeting  house  in  the  Ogden  19th 
Ward.  His  policy  is  to  keep  out  of  debt 
in  all  his  private  affairs  as  well  as  in 
affairs  pertaining  to  his  ward. 

BURTON,  Thomas  Hyrum,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Juab  Stake  from  1924  to  1930,  was 
born  Aug.  28,  1878,  at  Nephi,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Herbert  Burton  and  Mary  El- 
linor  Pass.  He  was  baptized  June  1, 
1887  by  James  D.  Paxton  and  after 
attending  school  in  Nephi  and  the 
Brigham  Young  University,  he  studied 
law,  being  graduated  from  the  Lincoln- 
Jefferson  University  of  Indiana  in 
1910  with  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of 
Laws.  He  was  admitted  to  practice 
in  the  State  of  Utah,  Oct.  9,  1911,  and 
in  the  United  States  Federal  Courts, 
Nov.  13,  1911.  He  practiced  as  attor- 
ney for  the  cities  of  Nephi,  Levan  and 
Delta,  was  judge  of  the  Juvenile  Court 
of  the  Fifth  Judicial  District,  attorney 
on  the  Council  of  Defence  of  Juab 
County  during  the  World  war  and 
District  Judge  of  the  Fifth  Judicial 
District,  comprising  the  counties  of 
Juab,  Millard,  Beaver,  Iron  and  Wash- 
ington during  the  years  1923-1929.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  Law  Committee 
which  drew  the  first  good  roads  law 
ever  placed  on  the  Utah  Statute  Books 
and  for  ten  years  was  chairman  of  the 
Law  Committee  of  the  Municipal 
League  of  Utah,  which  comprises  all 


122 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


of  the  cities  and  towns  in  the  State  of 
Utah.  Under  his  direction  and  super- 
vision the  Local  Option  Law  and  final- 
ly the  Prohibition  Law  of  the  State  of 
Utah  was  prepared  and  presented  to 
the  Legislature,  and  he  was  a  member 
of  the  House  of  Representatives  of  the 
State  of  Utah  in  1929  and  during  a 
special  session  in  1930.  On  Aug.  8, 
1900,  Bro.  Burton  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  B.  H.  Roberts  and  set  apart 


for  a  mission  to  the  Nortliei'n  States, 
during  which  he  labored  principally 
in  the  Southern  Illinois  Conference;  he 
returned  home  Sept.  5,  1901,  being 
honorably  released  on  account  of  the 
death  of  his  father.  On  Aug.  17,  1924, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Apostle  Rudger  Clawson  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  President  Albert 
H.  Belliston  of  the  Juab  Stake.  This 
position  he  held  until  his  death,  which 
occurred  Aug.  13,  1930,  following  a 
surgical  operation.  On  Jan.  14,  1903, 
he  had  married  Hannah  May  Pexton, 
daughter  of  Jos.  D.  Pexton  and  Mary 
Ellen  Grow.  Six  children  were  born 
of  this  mairiage,  namely  Dr.  Marcus 
H.  of  Washington,  D.  C,  Florence, 
Blanche,  Clarence  G.,  Alma  P.  and  Lee 
Clark.  Previous  to  being  called  to  the 
Stake  presidency  Judge  Burton  had 
presided  over  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 


Juab  Stake.  At  the  time  of  his  death 
he  was  superintending  the  remodeling 
of  several  meeting  houses  in  the  Stake 
including  the  Juab   Stake  tabernacle. 

BLUTH.  John  V.  (Continued  from 
Vol.  2,  p.  244.) 

In  September,  1921,  when  President 
James  Wotherspoon  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain,  Brother  Bluth 
was  chosen  president  of  the  North 
Weber  Stake.  He  selected  as  his  coun- 
selors, Francis  W.  Stratford  and 
Thomas  M.  Irvine.  This  position  he 
held  until  January,  1931,  when  he  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  Canadian 
Mission,  with  headquarters  at  Toronto. 
He  was  honorably  released  from  this 
mission,  turning  over  the  affairs  of  the 
mission  to  his  successor  July  15,  1935. 

From  1901  to  1916  he  continued  as 
deputy  county  clerk,  after  which  he 
became  affiliated  with  the  Scoville 
Brothers  in  their  broom,  printing  and 
lithographing  business  and  later  in 
their  oil  ventures,  until  his  call  to  the 
Canadian  mission. 

Since  commencing  his  activities  at 
the  Church  Historian's  Office  in  1936 
he  has  completed  his  concordance  to 
the  Doctrine  and  Covenants,  which  he 
commenced  many  years  ago. 

CALL,  Israel,  a  Patriarch  in  the  Da- 
vis Stake,  was  born  at  Fillmore,  Utah, 
July  2,  1854,  a  son  of  Anson  Call  and 
Ann  Mariah  Bowen  Call.  At  the  time 
of  Israel's  birth,  his  father  had  charge 
of  the  settlement  of  Millard  County 
and  for  this  reason  !iis  family  was 
there.  In  the  fall  of  1854,  when  Is- 
rael was  about  seven  weeks  old,  the 
family  moved  to  Call's  Fort,  Box  El- 
der Co.,  Utah,  to  again  assist  in  the 
founding  of  a  new  settlement.  Two 
years  later  the  family  was  moved  to 
help  settle  Carson  Valley,  but  return- 
ed the  following  spring,  to  Bountiful, 
their  former  home.  Again  in  1858  they 
were  moved  to  Call's  Fort  where  they 
remained  until  1860.  At  this  time,  An- 
son   Call    having   sold   his   interest   in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


123 


the  Fort,  returned  to  Bountiful  where 
the  family  remained  until  the  children 
were  matured. 

After  attending  the  schools  at  Boun- 
tiful, Israel,  in  1874,  studied  in  the 
University  of  Deseret,  which  at  that 
time  was  held  in  the  old  Council  House 
with  only  three  teachers.  In  Decem- 
ber 1874,  he  married  Medora  White, 
daughter  of  John  S.  and  Adelaide 
White  of  Farmington. 


President  Young  having  called  him 
to  go  to  Arizona  with  Lot  Smith  to 
help  settle  that  country,  he  and  his 
wife  and  one  child,  started  on  their 
journey,  Feb.  2,  1876.  After  a  hard 
trip  they  arrived  at  Sunset  Crossing 
on  the  Little  Colorado  River,  March 
24,  1876. 

Agreeable  to  the  instructions  of 
Pres.  Young  these  Arizona  settlers  en- 
tered into  the  United  Order,  but  the 
company  broke  up  in  the  summer  of 
1884. 

In  1880  (June  11th),  Brother  Call 
married  Jane  Lucinda  Judd  Knight, 
the  daughter  of  Hyrum  and  Lisania 
Judd  and  the  widow  of  Joseph  Knight. 

In  the  early  spring  of  1885,  when 
the  agitation  against  polygamy  arose, 
he  left  both  his  families  at  Sunset  so 
that  the  children  could  attend  school, 
and  went  to  Old  Mexico.   There  he  re- 


mained until  August,  when  he  return- 
ed to  Salt  Lake  City  in  order  to  seek 
medical  aid  for  his  wife's  eyes.  He 
left  his  wife,  Jane,  and  her  family  at 
Sunset  and  took  his  wife,  Medora  and 
family  to  Bountiful. 

Apostle  Erastus  Snow,  who  had 
charge  of  the  settlement  of  Arizona, 
told  him  that  if  he  kept  his  families 
apart  he  would  escape  prosecution  un- 
der the  Edmunds-Tucker  law.  This 
he  did,  having  one  family  in  Utah  and 
one  in  Arizona. 

His  wife  Jane  died  July  1,  1918,  at 
Mesa,  Arizona,  and  his  wife  Medora 
died  April  20,  1926,  at  Bountiful,  Utah. 

When  the  Davis  Stake  was  divided^ 
he  was  called  to  act  as  president  of 
the  High  Priests  Quorum  of  the  South 
Davis  Stake,  and  in  1910  he  was  chosen 
stake  genealogical  representative.  In 
1911  he  was  called  to  officiate  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple,  and  on  July  13, 
1930,  he  was  ordained  a  patriarch  of 
the  South  Davis  Stake.  (These  last 
two  positions  he  still  holds  at  the 
time  of  this  writing — May,  1936.) 

CALL,  Joseph  Clarence,  Bishop  of 
the  Bancroft  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  was 
born  Oct.  18,  1892,  at  Chesterfield, 
Idaho,  a  son  of  Ira  Call  and  Emma 
Jane  Barlow.  He  was  baptized  March 
3,  1901,  by  Judson  A.  Tolman,  and 
after  serving  in  the  various  offices  of 
the  Aaronic  Priesthood,  was  ordained 
an  Elder,  Jan.  12,  1917,  by  Charles 
S.  Martin,  a  Seventy,  Aug.  29,  1920, 
by  Charles  H.  Hart,  and  a  High  Priest, 
May  17,  1925,  by  George  F.  Richards. 
He  was  president  of  a  Deacons  Quo- 
rum in  1909,  when  he  moved  to  Den- 
ver, Colorado;  later  he  resided  in  New 
York,  his  work  as  an  engineer  and 
inventor  taking  him  into  many  states 
of  the  Union  and  also  into  Canada. 
After  his  return  to  Idaho  he  resided 
in  Bancroft  where  he  presided  over 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  served  as  clerk 
of  the  Bancroft  Ward  from  1920  to 
1922.  On  March  4,  1922,  he  was  set 
apart  as  a  president  of  the  197th  quo- 
rum  of  Seventy  by   George   F.   Rich- 


124 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


ards.  Elder  Call  was  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  to  Bishop  J.  Fred 
Corbett  of  the  Bancroft  Ward,  May 
17,  1925,  became  first  counselor  Nov. 
22,  1925,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  Jr.,  Nov.  17,  1929, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Ban- 
croft Ward.  He  and  his  wife  make  a 
point  of  doing  some  Temple  work 
yearly. 

On  Oct.  10,  1917,  Elder  Call  mar- 
ried Myrtle  Elizabeth  Eliason  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  This  union  has 
been  blessed  with  eight  children, 
namely,  Joseph  Eliason,  Lowell  Elia- 
son, Melvin  Eliason,  Betty  Jane, 
Myrtle,  Clarence  Eliason,  Erla  Mae, 
and   John   Eliason. 

In  secular  affairs  Bishop  Call  has 
acted  as  a  member  of  the  Village 
Board  of  Bancroft,  trustee  of  the  Ban- 
croft schools,  etc.  During  the  World 
war  he  served  as  a  corporal  and  then 
as  a  sergeant  and  was  attending 
the  Zachary  Taylor  Officers  Training 
School  in  Kentucky  when  the  armis- 
tice was  signed.  He  is  proprietor  of 
the  Bancroft  Electric  and  Machine 
Company. 

CALLISTER,  Thomas  Clark,  presi- 
dent of  the  Millard  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  May  1,  1881,  at  Fillmore,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Thomas  Clark  Callister  and 
Alice  McBride.  He  attended  the  ele- 
mentary and  secondary  schools  of  Fill- 
more, the  Millard  Stake  Academy,  the 
Brigham  Young  Academy  and  the  Ag- 
ricultural College  at  Logan,  graduat- 
ing from  the  latter  school  in  1903  with 
the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Science  in 
civil  engineering.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  1,  1889,  by  his  father;  ordained 
a  Deacon,  Nov.  12,  1893,  by  Frank  Mer- 
rill; ordained  a  teacher  Dec.  7,  1897,  by 
Nelson  S.  Bishop;  ordained  an  Elder 
July  25,  1901,  by  Thomas  C.  Callister; 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  John  A.  Beck- 
strand,  president  of  the  Millard  Stake, 
Nov.  13,  1921,  by  Apostle  Richard  R. 
Lyman.  Brother  Callister  held  this 
position    until    Sept.    16,    1928,    when, 


under  the  hands  of  Apostle  David  0. 
McKay,  he  was  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Millard  Stake,  which  position 
he  now  holds.  Pres.  Callister  has  al- 
ways been  active  in  the  Church,  work- 
ing in  the  Sunday  School  and  the  Mu- 
tual Improvement  Association,  and 
from  Oct.  23,  1925,  to  May  9,  1926, 
filled  a  mission  in  California,  being  the 
first  short  term  missionary  to  volun- 
teer his  services. 


On  May  17,  1906,  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,  he  married  Millie  Peterson, 
daughter  of  Andreas  and  Adelaide 
Mathews  Peterson  of  Scipio,  Utah.  To 
this  union  were  born  the  following 
children:  Edith  Helen,  Leland  Clark, 
Duane  Harold,  Blane,  Rulon  Andreas 
and  Grant  Thomas. 

While  Brother  Callister  has  never 
sought  political  office,  he  has  served 
as  city  engineer,  city  councilman  and 
mayor  of  Fillmore  City,  county  sur- 
veyor of  Millard  County  and  State 
representative  to  the  Utah  Legisla- 
ture. Always  being  active  in  civic 
affairs,  he  was  one  of  the  organizers 
and  the  first  president  of  the  Fillmore 
Commercial  Club;  district  chairman  of 
the  Liberty  Loan  Committee;  chair- 
man of  the  East  Millard  Chapter  of 
American  Red  Cross;  chairman  of 
Millard  County  division  of  Utah  Tax- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


125 


payers  Association;  chairman  of  Mil- 
lard County  District  of  Boy  Scouts  of 
America;  chairman  of  the  Sevier  Ca- 
nal Water  Users  Association  and 
member  of  the  executive  committee 
of  the  Sevier  River  Water  Users  As- 
sociation. 

Brother  Callister  has  been  active  in 
his  profession  as  an  engineer.  He  has 
held  positions  with  the  U.  S.  Reclama- 
tion Service,  doing  work  in  Utah, 
Idaho  and  Nevada,  and  also  with  the 
U.  S.  Forest  Service.  He  obtained  his 
position  with  the  Forest  Service  so 
that  he  might  have  a  better  oppor- 
tunity to  study  water  supply,  erosion 
and  flood  control,  and  it  was  largely 
through  his  untiring  efforts  as  an  en- 
gineer and  officer  of  Fillmore  City  that 
floods  have  been  controlled  in  the  Fill- 
more mountains.  He  has  been  suc- 
cessively resident  and  construction  en- 
gineer for  the  Sevier  River  Land  and 
Water  Company;  engineer  and  man- 
ager of  the  Pahvant  Irrigation  Dis- 
trict; engineer  and  manager  of  the 
East  Millard  Canal  Company;  direc- 
tor and  vice  president  and  president 
of  the  Central  Utah  Water  Company. 
He  was  one  of  the  organizers  of  the 
Millard  County  Telegraph  and  Tele- 
phone Company  and  for  more  than 
thirty  years  has  been  its  manager  and 
engineer.  This  company  has  six  ex- 
changes in  Millard  County  and  more 
than  two  hundred  miles  of  toll  lines. 
Brother  Callister  has  also  been  en- 
gaged in  farming,  stockraising  and 
banking. 

During  the  present  year  (1936) 
Brother  Callister  in  company  with  his 
son,  Duane,  who  had  just  completed 
a  three  and  one-half  year  mission  in 
Czechoslovakia,  toured  Norway,  Swe- 
den, Denmark  (the  birthplace  of 
Duane's  grandfather  Peterson),  Ger- 
many, Czechoslovakia,  Austria,  Italy, 
France,  Belgium,  Holland,  England, 
Isle  of  Man  (the  birthplace  of  his 
grandfather,  Thomas  Callister), 
Egypt,  Palestine,  Greece,  and  Yugo- 
slavia,   gathering    genealogical    data. 


visiting  many  of  the  missions  of  the 
Church,  and  studying  the  political, 
economic  and  religious  conditions  of 
the  people  of  these  countries.  When 
they  returned  home,  they  returned 
with  the  firm  conviction  that  Ameri- 
ca is  in  very  deed  a  favored  land  in 
which  to  live.  "A  land  which  is  choice 
above  all  other  lands." 

CHRISTENSEN,  Christen  N.,  Bish- 
op of  Salt  Lake  City  26th  Ward,  Pio- 
neer Stake,  Utah,  from  1907  to  1910, 
was  born  Dec.  9,  1874,  in  Copenhagen, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Axel  Christensen 
and  Anne  Marie  Nielsen.  With  his 
parents  he  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1876, 


crossing  the  Atlantic  Ocean  in  the 
ship  "Idaho,"  which  arrived  in  New 
York,  July  10;  the  company  arrived 
in  Ogden,  Utah,  July  18,  1876.  The 
Christensen  family  located  in  Brigham 
City,  where  Christen  was  baptized, 
June  24,  1883,  by  C.  J.  Nelson.  After 
having  been  ordained  to  offices  in  the 
Aaronic  Priesthood,  he  was  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Rudger  Clawson  in  July, 
1894.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy, 
Jan.  12,  1900,  by  Seymour  B.  Young, 


126 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


and  filled  a  mission  to  Denmark  in 
1900-1902,  laboring  in  the  Aalborg 
Conference.  During  this  mission  he 
brought  the  Gospel  to  his  mother's 
brother  and  family  (wife  and  two 
daughters)  who  all  joined  the  Church 
and  came  to  Zion.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop,  April  22, 
1907,  by  John  Henry  Smith  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  26th  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  Oct,  16, 
1910,  when  he  moved  to  Brigham  City, 
where  he  was  superintendent  of  a  Sun- 
day School  and  a  member  of  the  stake 
boards  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  Sunday 
School.  He  located  permanently  in 
Salt  Lake  City  in  1918,  where  he  pre- 
sided over  a  ward  Y.  M.  M.  L  A.  He 
worked  as  a  local  missionary,  presid- 
ing over  the  group,  which  labored  spe- 
cially among  non-member  residents 
of  the  Liberty  Stake.  In  1924,  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Tabernacle,  the  Liberty 
Stake  staged  a  pageant  with  a  cast 
of  over  one  thousand,  in  which  Elder 
Christensen  played  the  role  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  and  wore  Pres. 
Young's  coat.  On  Nov.  5,  1930,  he  was 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  L.  D.  S. 
Danish  organization  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
On  July  11,  1894,  brother  Christen- 
sen married  Anna  C.  Jorgensen  (a 
daughter  of  Asmus  Jorgensen  and 
Anna  B.  Andersen)  in  the  Logan  Tem- 
ple. One  son  (Marcus  Joy  Christen- 
sen) was  born  to  this  marriage.  His 
wife  died  in  April,  1903,  and  on  Nov. 
16,  1904,  he  married  Edith  Rushton 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  She  is  the 
daughter  of  Edwin  Rushton  and  Sarah 
Robinson.  Six  children  were  born  of 
this  marriage,  namely,  Max  R.,  Ruth 
R.,  Edwin  R.  (Rush),  Fae  R.,  Beth 
R.,  and  Marco  R,  For  several  years 
Elder  Christensen  has  been  engaged 
as  a  missionary  on  the  Temple  Block, 
Salt  Lake  City. 

CLAYSON,  Eli  James,  Stake  clerk 
of  the  Alpine  Stake,  was  born  Aug. 
9,  1867,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Eli  Clayson  and  Rhoda  Burris. 


He  was  baptized  Sept.  2,  1875,  by  Wil- 
liam Whitehead,  and  after  serving  in 
various  offices  of  the  Aaronic  Priest- 
hood, he  was  ordained  an  Elder,  Jan. 
21,  1894,  by  Bishop  Lorenzo  Argyle, 
and  a  High  Priest,  Jan.  20,  1901,  by 
Apostle  Reed  Smoot.   He  lived  in  Pay- 


son,  Utah  Co.,  until  he  was  ten  years 
old  and  later  resided  at  Lake  Shore 
and  still  later  at  American  Fork,  dur- 
ing which  time  he  occupied  many  po- 
sitions of  trust  in  Church  and  civil 
capacities.  Thus  he  was  an  alternate 
member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Nebo  Stake,  stake  superintendent  of 
Sunday  Schools,  treasurer  of  a  build- 
ing committee  and  clerk  in  the  Alpine 
Stake;  the  latter  position  he  has  held 
for  over  thirty  years.  He  was  the  first 
president  of  the  Alpine  District  Board 
of  Education,  treasurer  of  the  Ameri- 
can Fork  Irrigation  Company  for  sev- 
enteen years,  served  two  terms  in  the 
American  Fork  city  council,  and  as 
a  member  of  the  Utah  State  Legisla- 
ture for  two  terms    (1929-1931).    On 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


127 


Feb.  1,  1894,  he  married  Ann  Eliza- 
beth Hawkins  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple. Ten  children  have  been  born  of 
this  union,  namely,  Lillian,  James 
(deceased),  Lucy,  Merrill  Daniel,  Zina 
Elizabeth,  Leah  Rhoda  (deceased), 
Lourene  May,  Eli  Karl,  Ann,  and  Jo- 
seph Harold.  Five  of  the  eight  sur- 
viving children  have  filled  honorable 
missions.  Sister  Ann  Elizabeth  Haw- 
kins Clayson  died  at  American  Fork, 
Dec.  23,  1928,  and  on  May  17,  1933, 
Elder  Clayson  married  Mrs.  Ruby  T. 
Brown  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 

COLTON,  Byron  Owen,  president  of 
the  Roosevelt  Stake  of  Zion  was  born 
at  Provo,  Utah,  Feb.  15,  1882,  a  son 
of  Byron  Oliv.er  Colton  and  Sarah  Ma- 
ria Smith.  He  was  baptized  June  4, 
1891,  by  George  D.  IMerkley,  served  in 
offices  of  the  Aaronic  Priesthood  and 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  5,  1904,  by 
Joseph  H.  Bodily.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest,  Aug.  23,  1908,  by  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  as  an  al- 
ternate High  Councilor  in  the  Uintah 
Stake.  Elder  Colton  served  as  Bishop 
of  the  Maeser  Ward  of  the  Uintah 
Stake  from  1910  to  1918  and  as  Bishop 
of  the  Randlett  Ward  from  1918  to 
June  26,  1920,  when  the  Roosevelt 
Stake  was  organized  and  he  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  in  the  pres- 
idency of  that  stake.  This  position 
he  held  until  June  18,  1922,  when  he 
was  called  to  succeed  Pres.  Wm.  H. 
Smart  in  the  presidency  of  that  stake, 
being  set  apart  to  that  position  by 
Pres.  Rudger  Clawson. 

Pres.  Colton  was  a  graduate  of  the 
Brigham  Young  University  and  later 
qualified  as  a  civil  engineer.  He  was 
County  Surveyor  in  Uintah  County 
from  1905  to  1908  and  has  held  many 
positions  of  trust  including  School 
Trustee  and  member  of  School  Board. 

On  June  29,  1910,  he  married  Helen 
Merkley.  This  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  nine  children,  namely, 
Ruth,  Lula,  Merrill  Byron,  Margaret, 
Elmo  Sander,  Gordon  Leroy,  Miles 
Merkley,  Sarah  and  Grace  Eleanor. 


CRITCHLOW,  William,  a  Utah  pio- 
neer of  1851,  was  born  July  8,  1808, 
in  East  Deer  township,  Allegheny  Co., 
Pennsylvania,  at  the  head  waters  of 
the  Roaring  Run,  which  empties  in  the 
Allegheny  River.  It  seems  that  Wm. 
Critchlow   was   destined   to   endure    a 


life  of  suffering;  yet  he  was  never 
known  to  complain,  but  felt  that  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  was  over  him.  When 
he  was  about  nine  years  old  he  re- 
ceived a  shock  from  plunging  into  a 
river  to  bathe  when  his  body  was 
ovei'heated.  A  white  swelling  in  his 
ankle  was  the  result  and  for  about  a 
year  he  was  confined  to  his  bed  and 
walked  with  crutches  for  some  time 
afterwards.  After  the  death  of  his 
father  on  March  11,  1828,  he  was  for 
four  years  the  sole  support  of  his 
widowed  mother  and  eight  children, 
as  his  elder  brother  was  away  train- 
ing to  become  a  Presbyterian  preach- 
er. His  brother  having  returned  home, 
young  William  married  Harriet  Haw- 
kins of  Indiana  County,  Penn.,  on 
Feb.  14,  1832,  and  moved  to  Leech- 
burg,  Penn.,  where  he  built  a  home. 
On  July  27,  1838,  while  supervising  the 
building  of  a  draw  bridge  on  the  Penn- 
sylvania Canal,  at  a  point  near  Salts- 
burg,  he  fell  a  distance  of  eighteen 
feet,  striking  his  back  on  a  log,  and 


128 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sustained  an  injury  to  his  spine  which 
resulted  in  the  complete  paralysis  of 
his  lower  limbs.  Such  a  handicap,  to 
most  men  would  have  been  a  stop  to 
future  progress,  but  to  a  man  of  Wm. 
Critchlow's  caliber,  it  meant  only  an- 
other obstacle  which  must  be  over- 
come. 

In  the  month  of  February,  1839,  he 
first  heard  the  Gospel  preached  by  the 
Elders  and  was  visited  by  Elder  Free- 
man Nickerson,  who  left  with  him  a 
copy  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  and  one 
of  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants.  Re- 
ceiving a  strong  testimony  of  the  truth 
of  the  Gospel  by  reading  these  books, 
Wm.  Critchlow  was  baptized  in  May 
of  the  same  year  by  Samuel  James  and 
ordained  an  Elder  in  the  month  of 
August  following  by  Elder  Peter  Dus- 
tin.  In  May,  1840,  Brother  Critchlow 
was  appointed  to  preside  over  the 
Leechburg  Branch  of  the  Church.  On 
April  21,  1844,  he  arrived  in  Nauvoo 
on  the  steamer  "Charlotte"  and  was 
met  at  the  pier  by  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  to  whom  he  was  introduced  by 
the  Prophet's  brother  William.  After 
the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet,  Broth- 
er Critchlow  moved  to  a  settlement 
27  miles  south  of  Nauvoo,  where  he 
purchased  and  operated  a  twenty-five 
acre  farm,  but  in  1845,  on  account  of 
mob  violence,  he  fled  with  his  family 
to  Nauvoo,  where  he  received  his 
blessings  and  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  later  in  1845  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest.  After  the  exodus  of  the  Saints 
from  Nauvoo  in  1846,  Brother  Critch- 
low and  his  family  settled  in  Garden 
Grove,  Iowa,  where  both  he  and  his 
wife  taught  school.  Here  they  re- 
mained three  years  and  Brother 
Critchlow  was  appointed  the  first  Jus- 
tice of  the  Peace  at  Garden  Grove  and 
during  the  last  year  of  his  residence 
there,  presided  over  the  branch. 

On  Oct.  8,  1851,  Brother  Critchlow, 
wife  and  three  children  arrived  in  Utah 
and  located  in  Ogden  where  he  made 
his  permanent  home  and  taught  school 
for  a  time.    In  August,  1852,  he  was 


elected  Justice  of  the  Peace,  re-elected 
to  this  position  in  1854  and  also  serv- 
ed as  an  alderman  of  the  First  ward 
in  Ogden.  In  1855  he  was  elected  clerk 
and  city  recorder,  which  offices  he 
filled  with  fidelity  for  eleven  years. 
He  then  served  as  recorder  for  Weber 
County  for  twelve  years. 

Brother  Critchlow  never  held  a 
grudge  against  any  who  might  have 
wronged  him.  On  one  occasion  he  was 
thrown  from  his  buggy  and  lay  in  the 
road  unable  to  get  up  without  his 
crutches.  A  man  passed  whom  Broth- 
er Critchlow,  in  his  capacity  of  judge, 
had  sentenced  for  some  misdemeanor. 
This  man  jeered  and  laughed  at 
Brother  Critchlow  in  his  pitiable  con- 
dition and  passed  on  without  render- 
ing him  any  assistance.  But  when, 
some  time  later,  on  account  of  drought 
many  of  the  people  in  Weber  County 
were  destitute  of  bread  stuff,  this  man 
was  one  of  the  first  to  receive  a  sup- 
ply of  flour  from  Brother  Critchlow. 
On  Oct.  24,  1880,  Brother  Critchlow 
was  ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Pres. 
George  Q.  Cannon,  and  he  died  in  Oj?- 
den,  Utah,  June  7,  1894.  He  was  sur- 
vived by  two  children,  namely,  Ben- 
jamin C.  Critchlow  (bishop  of  the  Og- 
den First  Ward),  and  William  F. 
Critchlow.  His  only  daughter,  Char- 
lotte Canfield,  (with  whom  he  made 
his  home  after  his  wife's  death  in 
March,  1887),  died  the  year  previous 
to  his  death,  and  two  children  (Laz- 
arus and  Charles)  died  in  infancy. 
Brother  Critchlow's  life  was  very  hap- 
py. During  fifty-four  years  of  mar- 
ried life.  Brother  and  Sister  Critch- 
low were  scarcely  separated  for  a  day 
and  they  were  greatly  devoted  to  each 
other. 

Wm.  Critchlow  was  of  Scotch  de- 
scent. His  grandfather,  Wm.  Critch- 
low, was  called  the  Hero  of  the  Battle 
of  Saratoga  in  the  Revolutionary  v/ar, 
because  of  distinguished  service  at 
that  time.  William's  maternal  grand- 
father, Lieut.  Benjamin  Coe,  came  to 
America  about  1635  and  his  many  de- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


129 


scendants  have  been  known  through- 
out the  United  States  ever  since  as 
citizens  of  outstanding  character  and 
accomplishments,  numbering  among 
them  the  subject  of  this  sketch. 

Brother  Critchlow  was  paralyzed  for 
fifty-two  years  from  his  waist  down, 
but  this  handicap  did  not  prevent  him 
from  accomplishing  more  than  most 
men  do  who  have  the  use  of  all  their 
limbs.  He  not  only  took  up  land  and 
supervised  the  work  on  it,  but  with 
his  arms  and  hands  did  many  things 
which  were  necessary  to  be  done  in 
pioneer  times,  and  he  became  com- 
fortably well  off  financially.  He  was 
a  devout  student  of  the  Scriptures  and 
the  reading  of  the  Bible  was  a  part 
of  the  family  worship  strictly  adhered 
to  night  and  morning  in  his  home.  He 
made  God  his  friend  and  one  could  not 
be  in  his  presence  long  without  being 
made  aware  of  this  close  communion. 
He  acknowledged  the  hand  of  God  in 
all  of  his  afflictions  and  felt  that  they 
were  for  his  good. 

The  Gospel  was  uppermost  in  his 
mind  and  the  desire  to  spread  it  para- 
mount in  his  soul.  He  devoted  much 
of  his  time  writing  to  his  relatives  in 
the  east  explaining  the  Gospel  to  them. 
They,  in  turn,  felt  that  his  accident 
had  affected  his  mind  for  in  no  other 
way  could  they  understand  his  affilia- 
tion with  such  a  despised  people  as 
the  "Mormons."  He  sent  his  two  sons 
and  two  grandsons  upon  missions  be- 
fore his  death,  and,  through  his  cor- 
respondence was  able  to  gather  a  con- 
siderable record  of  his  relatives  and 
have  work  done  in  the  temple  for  them. 
His  life  was  a  benediction  to  his  fam- 
ily and  his  memory  will  ever  be  cher- 
ished by  them. 

ERICKSON,  George  Henry,  third 
Bishop  of  the  Lehi  Fifth  Ward,  Lehi 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  July 
8,  1884,  at  Koosharem,  Sevier  County, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Erick  Gustaf  Erick- 
son  and  Maria  Christina  Anderson. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  1,  1892,  by  his 


father;  ordained  a  Deacon  when  12 
years  old,  moved  to  Lehi  from  Koosh- 
arem in  July,  1899;  was  ordained  a 
Priest,  Jan.  13,  1902,  by  Andrew  R. 
Anderson;  was  ordained  an  Elder,  Feb. 
4,  1906,  by  Wm.  Ashen,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1907- 
1910,  laboring  in  the  East  Tennessee 
Conference.  In  1911  (Sept.  14)  he 
married  Myrtle  Bone  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,  which  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  seven  children,  namely, 
Marie,  Thella,  Keith,  Floyd,  Lela,  June 
and  Larry  Blaine.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  December,  1911,  by 
Charles  H.  Hart,  and  shortly  after- 
wards chosen  as  one  of  the  presidents 
of  the  68th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
also  acted  as  clerk  of  the  Lehi  First 
Ward,  until  September,  1916,  when  he 
moved  to  Delta,  Millard  County,  Utah. 
He  returned  to  Lehi  in  November, 
1917.  When  the  Lehi  Fifth  Ward  was 
organized  Feb.  29,  1920,  he  was  chosen 
as  ward  clerk,  serving  in  that  capac- 
ity until  August  7,  1927.  Having  been 
sustained  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Virgil  H.  Peterson,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Patriarch  Hyrum  G. 
Smith,  Jan.  14,  1928,  and  served  as  a 
counselor  until  July  8,  1928,  when  he 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  Lehi  Fifth 
Ward.  He  was  ordained  and  set  apart 
to  that  position  Aug.  23,  1928,  by  Apos- 
tle Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

ERIKSEN,  Bendt  Jensen,  a  mission- 
ary to  Scandinavia  and  to  the  Indians, 
was  born  Oct.  18,  1832,  in  Vasingered, 
Frederiksborg  amt,  Sjaelland,  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Christian  Eriksen  and 
Dorthea  Bendt.  The  early  part  of  his 
life  was  spent  with  his  parents  in 
Copenhagen  and  vicinity.  Receiving 
such  education  as  the  public  schools 
of  his  country  and  time  afforded,  he 
made  the  best  of  his  opportunity,  as 
evidenced  by  his  breadth  of  informa- 
tion and  his  unusual  command  of  the 
Danish  language. 

He  married  early  in  life  and  became 
the  father  of  three  children,  but  a  con- 


Vol.  IV.   No.   9 


February  29.    1936 


180 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


tagious  disease  very  soon  robbed  him 
of  his  entire  family.  When  he  was  yet 
a  young  man  he  joined  the  Church  of 
Jesus  Christ  of  Latter-day  Saints  and 
immediately  became  one  of  its  mis- 
sionaries. 

In  February,  1864,  he  sailed  for 
America.  The  ship  "Louis  Napoleon," 
on  which  he  was  passenger,  caught  fire 
and  was  burned  in  mid-ocean.  With 
other  passengers,  he  lingered  for  three 
days  in  small  life  boats,  but  they  were 
finally  rescued.  He,  however,  lost  all 
his  baggage,  landing  in  New  York  al- 
most penniless. 


His  westward  journey  was  typical 
of  the  immigrant  youth  of  his  time. 
He  worked  a  few  days  and  used  his 
earnings  to  carry  him  westward.  After 
some  weeks  he  arrived  in  the  Middle 
West,  where  he  joined  a  company  of 
"Mormon"  pioneers  and  secured  trans- 
portation across  the  Plains,  which  was 
nothing  other  than  an  opportunity  to 
walk  beside  an  ox  team. 

In  Utah  his  was  the  life  of  a  typ- 
ical pioneer.  Arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in  the  early  60s,  he  became  one 
of  Utah's  frontiersmen.  He  first  set- 
tled in  Weber  county,  and  later  in 
Box  Elder  and  Cache  counties,  and 
finally  made  his  home  in  Preston, 
Idaho. 


His  entire  life  was  dedicated  to  the 
welfare  of  his  family,  community  and 
Church.  He  filled  two  missions  in  his 
native  land,  Denmark,  and  one  among 
the  Indians  of  Arizona  in  1870.  He 
was  a  courageous  defender  of  his  re- 
ligious principles,  and  until  his  death 
active  in  civic  and  religious  enter- 
prises. 

For  a  number  of  years  Brother  Erik- 
sen  was  president  of  the  Scandinavian 
organization  in  the  Oneida  Stake  and 
traveled  extensively  among  the  com- 
munities of  southern  Idaho,  giving 
temporal  and  spiritual  assistance  to 
foreigners,  who  were  attempting  to 
build  homes  in  the  new  country. 

He  reared  a  large  family.  His  wife, 
Anna  Jepperson,  whom  he  married 
while  at  Milton,  died  after  giving  birth 
to  one  child,  Anna.  He  later  married 
Ellen  Jonasson,  who  bore  him  three 
children,  namely,  Marie  (deceased), 
Peter  and  Moroni  (deceased).  Still  la- 
ter he  married  Anna  Sophia  Daniel- 
son  who  bore  him  three  children,  El- 
dena  (deceased),  Ephraim  Edward, 
and   Alma   D. 

Brother  Eriksen  has  also  numerous 
grandchildren  and  great-grandchil- 
dren. 

Moral  courage,  a  fine  sense  of  jus- 
tice, undying  devotion  to  his  family, 
his  community  and  his  church,  marked 
his  career.  He  died  in  October,  1906, 
at  the  age  of  73. 

FRIDAL,  Knud  Hansen,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Elwood  Ward,  Tremon- 
ton.  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  21,  1854,  on  the  island  of  Fyen, 
Denmark,  a  son  of  Hans  Olsen  and 
Karen  Marie  Jorgensdatter.  When 
about  fourteen  years  old  he  heard  the 
Gospel  and  was  converted  to  its  truth. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1873,  with 
976  Latter-day  Saints,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  in  the  steamship  "Wisconsin" 
which  arrived  in  New  York,  July  2, 
1873.  Continuing  the  journey  by  rail 
he  arrived  in  Ogden,  July  24,  1873. 
Soon   afterwards   he   located   in   Bear 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


131 


River  City  and  in  1875  was  called  by 
Pres.  Lorenzo  Snow  to  labor  for  two 
years  in  the  United  Order,  which  had 
been  established  in  Box  Elder  County 
at  that  time.  For  a  few  months  he 
worked  in  the  tailor  shop  in  Brigham 
City  and  then,  at  his  own  request,  was 
given  the  position  of  chief  herder  of 
the  Co-op  dairy  stock.  During  this 
time  there  were  many  Indians  around 
and  he  became  acquainted  with  some 
of  them,  who  remained  his  friends  long 
afterwards.  It  also  gave  him  a  chance 
to  study  and  enjoy  nature,  which  he 
so  dearly  loved.  Brother  Fridal  re- 
mained with  the  United  Order  until 
it    was    dissolved.     He    also    labored 


faithfully  as  a  ward  teacher,  ward 
chorister,  officer  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  Sunday  School,  and  as  he  was 
an  excellent  musician,  his  ability  to 
play  the  violin  and  other  instruments 
was  a  great  help  to  the  community.  He 
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Bear 
River  Brass  Band.  From  1895  to  1897 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Denmark,  labor- 
ing principally  in  the  cities  of  Esbjerg 
and  Copenhagen.  When  the  Manila 
Ward  was  organized  Dec.  16,  1900, 
Brother  Fridal  was  chosen  second 
counselor  in  the  bishopric.  On  Sept. 
6,  1908,  he  was  advanced  to  the  posi- 
tion  of   first   counseloi-  in    the   same 


ward,  then  called  Elwood.  On  Oct.  11, 
1908,  when  the  Bear  River  Stake  was 
organized,  Elder  Fridal  was  appoint- 
ed Bishop  of  the  Elwood  Ward  and  set 
apart  to  that  office  by  Apostle  George 
F.  Richards.  He  served  as  Bishop  un- 
til Nov.  12,  1914,  when  the  ward  was 
divided  into  the  Elwood  and  Tremon- 
ton  wards,  when  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased. On  Dec.  12,  1914,  he  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  High  Priests 
Quorum  of  the  Bear  River  Stake,  in 
which  capacity  he  visited  the  different 
wards  of  the  stake  each  month  with 
the  High  Council.  In  a  civil  capacity 
Brother  Fridal  served  eight  years  as 
Justice  of  the  Peace  -^f  the  Manila 
Precinct.  He  passed  away  at  his  home 
in  Tremonton,  Oct.  25,  1933. 

The  following  extract  is  taken  from 
the  local  newspaper  published  at  the 
time  of  his  death:  "He  was  a  kind  and 
loving  husband  and  father,  a  man  pos- 
sessed of  those  characteristics  admired 
by  all — kind  and  charitable,  gentle  and 
forgiving,  but  firm  in  the  right,  he  was 
a  wise  counselor  and  true  friend,  and 
was  sought  by  many  for  his  counsel 
and  advice.  He  gave  much  of  his  time 
and  means  to  assist  in  building  up  and 
developing  this  and  surrounding  com- 
munities." 

FRIDAL,    Mary    (Marie)     Hansen, 

wife  of  Knud  H.  Fridal,  was  born  on  the 
island  of  Fyen,  Denmark,  Jan.  28, 1859, 
a  daughter  of  Rasmus  Hansen  and  Ane 
Katrine  Christensen.  She  was  con- 
verted to  "Mormonism"  when  quite 
young  and  was  baptized  March  20, 
1871,  by  Chresten  Nielsen,  and  con- 
firmed the  same  day  by  Niels  C.  Edlef- 
sen.  With  her  mother,  her  sister  Kirs- 
ten  and  other  relatives,  she  left  Den- 
mark in  June,  1871,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic Ocean  in  the  S.  S.  "Minnesota." 
After  arriving  in  New  York  the  com- 
pany, consisting  of  397  Latter-day 
Saints,  continued  the  journey  by  rail 
and  arrived  in  Utah  in  July,  1871.  She 
located  first  in  Bear  River  City  and 
then  went  to  Logan,  where  she  spent 
the  first  winter.    From   1876  to  1879 


132 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


she  taught  the  summer  school  in  Bear 
River  City.  She  was  married  to  Knud 
H.  Fridal,  Nov.  15,  1878,  in  the  En- 
dowment House  in  Salt  Lake  City  by 
Daniel  H.  Wells.  She  was  called  to 
act  as  secretary  of  the  Bear  River 
City  Relief  Society,  Aug.  5,  1875, 
which  position  she  held  for  over  25 
years,  or  until  May  12,  1901,  when  she 
was    set    apart    as    president    of    the 


Elwood  Relief  Society.  This  office  she 
held  with  fidelity  until  Aug.  31,  1913, 
when  she  was  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Bear  River  Stake  Relief 
Society.  On  June  4,  1916,  she  was  sus- 
tained as  first  counselor  in  that  organ- 
ization which  position  she  held  with 
honor  until  the  time  of  her  death, 
which  occurred  Oct.  30,  1925,  thus 
being  over  fifty  years  continuously  an 
officer  in  the  Relief  Society.  She  was 
second  counselor  in  the  Bear  River 
City  Retrenchment  Society  (now  Y. 
W.  M.  L  A.)  from  Jan.  3,  1876,  to 
Nov.  21,  1881,  and  first  counselor  in 
the  same  organization  from  1881  to 
1890.  Sister  Fridal  was  the  mother 
of  eight  children,  namely,  Knud  H. 
Fridal,  jun.,  Walter  E.,  John  Henry, 
Verne  A.,  Ira  O.,  Lucy  (Mrs.  Bow- 
cutt),  Hazel  (Mrs.  Wright),  and  May. 
Sister    Fridal    was    a    devoted    wife, 


mother  and  friend.   Her  life  was  filled 
with  acts  of  charity  and  love. 

FULLMER,  Benjamin,  Bishop  of 
the  Alpine  Ward,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1907-1913,  was  born  May  4,  1872,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Eu- 
gene B.  Fullmer  and  Sarah  Jane 
Mitchell.  He  was  raised  in  the  Sixth 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  at- 
tended the  public  schools,  and  later 
took  a  correspondence  business  course. 
He  was  baptized  May  4,  1880,  and 
taking  an  active  part  in  Church  af- 
fairs, he  was  ordained  a  Deacon,  Dec. 
31,  1882,  by  James  Leatham,  and  act- 
ed as  a  counselor  in  the  Deacons'  quo- 
I'um;  was  ordained  a  Priest,  April  12, 
1889,  by  Jesse  West;  ordained  an  El- 
der, June  10,  1895,  by  Charles  H. 
Hyde;  ordained  a  Seventy,  June  27, 
1897,  by  Apostle  George  Teasdale,  and 
became  a  member  of  the  23rd  quorum 


of  Seventy.  In  1895  (June  12),  he 
married  Nellie  Needham  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  Eight  children  are  the 
issue  of  this  marriage,  viz:  Myrtle, 
Earl  N.,  Mildred,  Arvilla,  Elizabeth, 
Sarah,  Virginia  and  La  Ree.  In  1897- 
1900  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States,  laboring  principally  in 
West  Virginia.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop    by    Apostle    Rudger    Clawson 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


133 


and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Al- 
pine Ward,  which  position  he  held  un- 
til Dec.  20,  1913.  After  that  he  resided 
for  a  short  time  in  American  Fork, 
and  finally  located  in  Salt  Lake  City 
in  1917.  Elder  Fullmer  has  occupied 
a  number  of  secular  positions  in  the 
community.  Thus  he  served  as  mayor 
of  Alpine  City,  as  deputy  sheriff  in 
Utah  County,  and  as  city  marshal  at 
American  Fork.  He  has  followed  mer- 
chandising in  Alpine  and  Salt  Lake 
City  and  is  at  present  (1936)  engaged 
as  a  contractor  and  builder  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  In  a  Church  capacity  he 
has  labored  as  a  home  missionary. 
His  wife  died  Oct.  17,  1928,  at  his  resi- 
dence in  the  Eighth  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  in  1936  (Aug.  1)  he  mar- 
ried Emily  Bulmer,  a  widow,  daugh- 
ter of  Joseph  and  Emily  P.  Brooks. 

GARDNER,    James    Hamilton,    the 

first  Bishop  of  the  Lehi  Second  Ward 
(Alpine  Stake),  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was 
born  July  29,  1859,  at  Mill  Creek,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Archibald 
Gardner  and  Sarah  Hamilton.  His 
father  was  a  Utah  pioneer  of  1847,  a 
natural  leader  of  men,  resourceful,  en- 
ergetic, able  to  cope  with  new  condi- 
tions, and  as  a  mill  builder  and  pio- 
neer had  but  few  equals  in  the  West. 
The  father  being  too  busy  with  public 
works  to  spend  much  time  with  his 
children,  James  H.  was  compelled  to 
depend  largely  upon  himself  from  his 
early  youth.  Like  most  others  of  that 
period  he  had  but  little  opportunity 
for  education,  his  entire  school  life 
consisting  of  six  winters  in  the  com- 
mon schools.  The  rest  of  his  time  was 
spent  working  upon  the  farm  and, 
after  he  had  reached  young  manhood, 
in  the  lumber  camps.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old  and  sub- 
sequently ordained  to  the  Priesthood. 
In  1880-1884  he  filled  a  mission  to  Ha- 
waii and  for  three  years  and  a  half 
he  was  engaged  in  both  missionary 
and  secular  labors  in  that  "garden 
spot  of  the  world."  Arriving  upon 
the  islands  just  at  the  time  the  sugar 


boiler  on  the  Laie  plantation  was  about 
to  i-eturn  home,  Brother  Gardner  was 
assigned  to  work  in  the  sugar  mill 
and  thereby  became  a  thorough  mas- 
ter of  the  art  of  boiling  sugar.  After 
his  return  to  Utah  he  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Abraham  H.  Cannon  and 
followed  various  kinds  of  employment. 
In  1886  (Oct.  15)  he  married  Rhoda 
Priscilla  Huffaker  (daughter  of  Simp- 
son D.  Huffaker  and  Rhoda  P.  Bar- 
num),  who  was  born  Dec.  30,  1864. 
This  union  has  been  blessed  with  nine 
children,  namely,  James  Hamilton, 
Archibald  Delos,  Viola,  Vera,  Reid 
Huffaker,  LeRoy  Barnum,  Marian, 
Feme,  and  Lois.  Soon  after  his  mar- 
riage. Brother  Hamilton  located  in 
the  great  Snake  River  Valley  in  Idaho 
and  struggled  for  several  years  to 
subdue  this  new  country,  making  it  fit 
for  habitation.  In  1890  the  Lehi  sugar 
factory  was  built,  and  as  an  immediate 
necessity  of  obtaining  workmen  to  run 
it  arose.  Brother  Gardner  was  sum- 
moned to  Lehi  and  became  a  success- 
ful sugar  maker,  serving  successively 
as  sugar  boiler,  night  foreman,  gen- 
eral foreman,  and  finally  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  factory.  Later  he  was 
made  general  consulting  superinten- 
dent and  a  member  of  the  technical 
board  which  controls  the  operation  of 
the  plants. 

Since  his  residence  in  Lehi,  Elder 
Gardner  has  given  a  large  part  of  his 
time  and  talents  to  the  work  of  public 
sei'vice,  serving  one  term  in  the  city 
council,  and  also  as  a  commissioner 
of  Utah  County.  He  helped  to  estab- 
lish new  enterprises  in  Lehi,  extend- 
ing his  activities  to  the  mei'cantile  and 
banking  business,  and  to  dry  farm- 
ing, fruit  culture  and  stock  raising. 

In  1903,  when  the  Lehi  Ward  was 
divided,  James  H.  Gardner  was  chosen 
Bishop  of  the  Lehi  Second  Ward. 

GILBERT,  Alonzo  Jesse,  president 
of  the  Idaho  Stake  of  Zion,  was  born 
April  11,  1888,  at  Fairview,  Oneida 
Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Jesse  Gilbert  and 
Mary  Ann  Harris.    He   was  baptized 


134 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


July  2,  1897,  by  Joseph  S.  Wright  and 
later  ordained  to  the  Aarnnic  Priest- 
hood. After  being  ordained  an  Elder 
Oct.  27,  1907,  by  William  Tanner,  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1907-1909,  during  which  he  labored 
in  the  Nottingham  Conference  and 
baptized  fourteen  persons.  He  return- 
ed home,  Dec.  25,  1909,  after  having 
traveled  16,000  miles.  During  the  next 
three  years  he  worked  on  his  father's 
farm  at  Whitney,  Idaho,  and  was  ac- 
tive in  the  ward  as  a  Sunday  School 
teacher  and  a  class  leader  in  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  and  on  Nov.  27,  1910,  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  Charles  H.  Hart 


and  later  became  a  president  of  the 
197th  Quorum.  In  1913  Elder  Gilbert 
moved  to  Fairview,  Idaho,  and  a  year 
later  to  Bancroft,  where  he  establish- 
ed permanent  residence.  From  1920- 
1922,  he  served  on  the  Idaho  Stake 
Sunday  School  Board.  On  June  4,  1922 
he  was  appointed  clerk  of  the  Ban- 
croft Ward  and  on  Jan.  30,  1926,  be- 
came clerk  of  the  Idaho  Stake.  On 
May  18,  1930,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Idaho 
Stake  by  Apostle  Melvin  J.  Ballard, 
and  on  Sept.  2,  1934,  was  sustained  as 
president  of  the  Idaho  Stake,  being 
set  apart  to  that  position  by  Apostle 


Richard  R.  Lyman.  Elder  Gilbert 
mai-ried  Jennie  Layton  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  Oct.  30,  1907,  the  cere- 
mony being  performed  by  John  R. 
Winder.  Sister  Gilbert  is  a  daughter 
of  Christopher  Layton  and  Mary  Jane 
Roberts,  and  has  become  the  mother 
of  two  sons  and  one  daughter. 

In  secular  affairs  Pres.  Gilbert 
served  as  a  school  trustee  for  12 
years  and  as  chairman  of  the  board 
two  years.  In  1931  he  was  elected 
Trustee  of  the  Village  of  Bancroft,  in 
which  position  he  served  four  years, 
two  as  chairman  of  the  board.  Pres. 
Gilbert  is  a  farmer  and  stock  raiser 
by  avocation. 

GILES,  James  Arthur,  seventh 
Bishop  of  the  14th  Ward  (Salt  Lake 
Stake),  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was 
born  Aug.  20,  1889,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
the  son  of  James  Joseph  Giles  and 
Annie  Grace  Winter.  He  was  ordain- 
ed a  Deacon,  Jan.  31,  1902,  by  Joshua 
E.  Salisbury;  a  Teacher,  June  5,  1907, 
by  Nels  Monson;  a  Priest,  Aug.  7, 
1907,  by  Chr.  N.  Christensen;  an  El- 
der, Nov.  11,  1907,  by  Frank  D.  Jones; 
a  Seventy,  Jan.  31,  1915,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young,  and  a  High  Priest,  May  2, 
1920,  by  Charles  H.  Hyde.  In  each 
of  these  quorums  he  held  leading  po- 
sitions, being  president  of  a  Deacons' 
Quorum,  president  of  a  Teachers' 
Quorum,  secretary  in  a  Priests'  Quor- 
um and  instructor  in  Elders'  and  Sev- 
enties' Quorum.  From  1908  to  1910 
he  labored  as  a  missionary  in  the 
Western  States  Mission,  during  which 
time  he  acted  as  president  of  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Denver.  He  also  served 
as  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
26th  Ward  for  two  years,  member  of 
the  Stake  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in 
the  Pioneer  Stake  for  ten  years  (part 
of  the  time  as  counselor  in  the  super- 
intendency,  and  later  as  stake  super- 
intendent of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.)  Bro. 
Giles  also  served  as  chairman  of  the 
26th  Ward  Recreation  Committee  for 
three  years  and  on  the  Pioneer  Stake 
Recreation     Committee     for     several 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


135 


years.  He  served  as  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  in  the  Pioneer 
Stake  and  also  in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake. 
While  residing  in  the  17th  Ward 
(Salt  Lake  Stake)  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  for  two 
years,  and  as  supervisor  of  Priesthood 
activity  for  one  year,  and,  while  still 
a  member  of  that  ward  was  called  to 


succeed  George  Q.  Morris  as  Bish- 
op of  the  14th  Ward,  being  ordained 
a  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  that 
position,  Jan.  13,  1924,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard.  After  serving  as  Bishop  of 
the  14th  Ward  for  more  than  twelve 
years,  Bishop  Giles  was  honorably  re- 
leased at  a  ward  conference  held  Oct. 
18,  1936,  having  been  called  into  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  High  Council  to  su- 
pervise the  labors  of  the  Aaronic 
Priesthood,  a  position  for  which  he  is 
particularly  fitted,  having  previously 
labored  with  such  marked  success  in 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  work. 

On  April  24,  1912,  Bro.  Giles  mar- 
ried Alice  Margaret  Stanley  (daugh- 
ter of  Bishop  Frank  Stanley)  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  This  union  has 
been  blessed  with  six  children,  namely, 
Margaret  Annie,  Mary  Alice,  Shirley 
Grace,  Jean  Arline  and  James  Arthur 


(twins  who  died  within  two  weeks  of 
birth),  and  Virginia  Aleen.  Bishop 
Giles  has  followed  the  printing  busi- 
ness practically  all  his  life,  having 
commenced  that  work  when  only  14 
years  of  age.  Bishop  Giles  is  blessed 
with  a  very  genial  disposition  and 
seems  to  be  specially  suited  to  fill  the 
position  he  occupies  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake. 

GOFF,  Clifford  Isaac,  a  senior  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  of  the  East 
Jordan  Stake,  was  born  July  27,  1877, 
in  West  Jordan  (now  Midvale),  Utah, 
a  son  of  Hyrum  Goff  and  Maria  T.  Ar- 
nold.    He    was    baptized    in    the   "Old 
Mill  Race,"  West  Jordan,  Aug.  6,  1885, 
by  Bishop  Archibald  Gardner  and  con- 
firmed the  same  day  by  his  father,  Hy- 
rum Goff.    He  was  ordained  a  Deacon 
May  16,  1891,  a  Priest,  June  1,  1893, 
by  his  father,  an  Elder,  Oct.  3,  1907, 
by    William    L.   Bateman,    a   Seventy, 
Feb.  25,  1906,  by  Peter  T.  Rundquist, 
and  a  High  Priest,  Jan.  25,  1906.    He 
began  school  in  what  was  known  as 
the    "Old    Mud    Temple"    in    Midvale, 
Utah,  when  he  was  six  years  old,  with 
Elizabeth  Cutler  as  teacher.    Contin- 
uing in  the  grade  schools,  the  Central 
Seminary  at  Murray,  and  the  Brigham 
Young  University  at  Provo,  he  gradu- 
ated from  the  latter  institution  in  the 
spring  of  1898.    Just  before  his  grad- 
uation, Brother  Goff  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  State  of  Colorado,  but 
two  months   later,  before  leaving  his 
home,  he  was  given  an  honorable  re- 
lease, accompanied  by  a  call  to  go  to 
Manassa,  San  Luis  Valley,  Colorado, 
to  take  the  principalship  of  the  Church 
schools    of   that    place.     This    position 
he  held  for  three  years.    Upon  his  re- 
turn home  he  was  made  principal  of 
the     East     Jordan     District     Schools, 
which  position  he  held  for  eight  years. 
While  in  Colorado  he  was  the  M.   I. 
A.    chorister    and    the   ward    chorister 
of    Manassa    for    three    years.     From 
1901  to  1905  he  served  as  first  assist- 
ant    superintendent     on     the     Jordan 
Stake    Sundav    School    Board    and    as 


136 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


superintendent    of    that    board    from 
1905  to  1919. 

He  sei'ved  as  chairman  of  the  Lesser 
Priesthood  Committee  in  the  Jordan 
and  East  Jordan  stakes  from  Aug. 
10,  1909,  until  September,  1935.  He 
was  a  member  of  the  District  Board 
of  Boy  Scouts  of  America  in  Jordan 
Stake    from    1920    to    1927,    when    he 


became  chairman  of  the  East  Jordan 
Stake  Boy  Scouts  organization,  which 
position  he  still  (1936)  holds.  He 
served  as  superintendent  of  Religion 
Classes  of  the  Jordan  Stake  for  four 
years,  as  stake  chorister  of  the  Jor- 
dan Stake  for  eight  years  and  served 
in  the  same  capacity  in  East  Jordan 
Ward  for  eight  years.  He  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Jordan  Stake  Board  of  Edu- 
cation for  seven  years  and  is  now  a 
member  of  the  East  Jordan  Stake 
Board  of  Education  and  a  High  Coun- 
cil advisor  to  the  Boy  Scouts  of  Amer- 
ica in  that  Stake.  He  was  set  apart 
as  an  alternate  High  Councilor  in  the 
Jordan  Stake,  Aug.  10,  1919,  by  Pres. 
John  G.  Sharp,  who  also  set  him  apart 


as  a  regular  High  Councilor,  Nov.  12, 
1922.  When  the  Jordan  Stake  was 
divided  May  9,  1927,  Brother  Goff  was 
set  apart  as  the  Senior  High  Coun- 
cilman of  the  East  Jordan  Stake  by 
Apostle  John  A.  Widtsoe,  which  posi- 
tion he  still  holds. 

In  civil  affairs  Elder  Goff  has 
served  as  postmaster  at  West  Jordan 
(now  Midvale)  by  appointment  of 
Pres.  Theodore  Roosevelt  and  later  of 
Pres.  Howard  Taft,  which  position  he 
held  for  eight  years.  He  again  served 
as  postmaster  at  the  same  place  from 
May  20,  1930,  to  Feb.  14,  1935,  by  ap- 
pointment of  Pres.  Herbert  Hoover. 

He  also  served  as  deputy  sheriff, 
city  justice  and  sexton  of  Midvale, 
helped  to  organize  the  first  commer- 
cial club  there  and  became  its  first 
secretary,  was  a  charter  member  of 
rhe  Midvale  Progressive  Club  and 
served  as  its  secretary  for  three  years. 
He  was  a  probation  officer  in  Salt  Lake 
County  for  two  years,  and  after  being 
made  a  charter  member  of  the  Mid- 
vale Volunteer  Fire  Department  he 
has  been  a  member  of  the  Utah  State 
Firemen's  Association  for  the  past  15 
years.  He  has  been  a  notary  public 
for  the  past  26  years  and  was  a  m^pi- 
ber  of  the  board  of  directors  of  the 
People's  State  Bank  and  of  the  Mid- 
vale State  Bank. 

Of  late  years  Brother  Goff  is  a  mor- 
tician and  funeral  director,  and  oper- 
ates a  mortuary,  known  as  the  C.  I. 
Goff  &  Son  Mortuary,  he  having  be- 
come a  licensed  embalmer  in  1917  and 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Utah  State 
Board  of  Examiners  of  Embalmers 
from  1924  to  1931.  He  has  been  sec- 
retary of  several  mining  companies 
and  is  now  secretary  of  the  Tintic  Out- 
post Mining  Company,  and  presi- 
dent of  the  Goff  Investment  Company, 
and  of  the  Goff  family  genealogical 
association. 

On  Sept.  2,  1903,  Elder  Goff  mar- 
ried Sabina  Josephine  Larson,  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  Five  children  have 
been  bom  of  this  union  namely,  Leo 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


137 


Clifford  (born  Jan.  4,  1905,  and  died 
Jan.  30,  1909),  Louis  Edwin  (born 
Aug.  17,  1906),  Cora  Madge  (born 
Dec.  13,  1907),  Melba  Berniece  (born 
Aug.  22,  1909),  and  Coral  (born 
March  30,   1911). 

GREGORY,  Elijah  Binam,  Bishop 
of  Farmington  Ward,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
was  born  Feb.  7,  1883,  at  Bairdstown, 
Lamar  County,  Texas,  a  son  of  Sam- 
uel L.  Gregory  and  Lydia  A.  Myers. 

He  was  baptized  Dec.  25,  1896,  by 
John  Wood,  ordained  a  Deacon  in  the 
fall  of  1900  at  Massey,  Oklahoma,  by 
President  James  G.  Duffin  of  the 
Southwestern  States  Mission,  and  or- 
dained a  Priest,  Jan.  21,  1905,  by  Ja- 
cob Miller  at  Farmington,  Utah. 
Brother  Gregory  was  ordained  an  El- 
der, May  10,  1909,  by  James  Wm. 
Walker,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  from  1909  to  1911.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy,  Nov.  17,  1913, 
by  Amasa  L.  Clark  and  served  as  one 
of  the  presidents  of  the  56th  quorum 
of  Seventy  from  1918  to  1929.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest,  Nov.  26,  1929, 
by  Edw.  B.  Clark,  and  a  Bishop  by 
Apostle  Rudger  Clawson,  Jan,  25, 
1931,  and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Farmington  Ward.  Elder  Gregory 
served  as  an  officer  and  class  leader 
in  various  quorums  of  the  Priesthood 
and  auxiliary  organizations  with 
which  he  was  associated  from  his 
youth  and  acted  as  chorister  of  the 
Farmington  Ward  from  1918  to  1931. 

In  civil  life  Elder  Gregory  served 
as  city  councilman  two  terms,  and  as 
director,  and  at  present,  as  president 
of  the  Miller  Floral  Company  of  Farm- 
ington. In  1912  he  married  Julia  Ellen 
Tree  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  seven 
children  namely,  Frederick  Levi,  born 
Sept.  24,  1913;  Julia  Fern,  born  Sept. 
9,  1915;  Rulon  Wells,  born  Sept.  22, 
1918;  LeGrande  E.,  born  Sept.  30, 
1921;  Harold  Lamar,  born  Nov.  9, 
1923;  Helen  Ruth,  born  May  2,  1926, 
and  died  Feb.  27,  1930;  Dorothy  Mae, 
born  Aug.  16,  1931. 


GROVER,  Thomas,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  in 
Whitehall,  Washington  Co.,  New  York, 
July  22,  1807,  the  son  of  Thomas  Gro- 
ver  and  Polly  Spalding.  As  the  fa- 
ther, Thomas,  had  died  during  the  pre- 
vious February,  the  rearing  and  teach- 
ing of  the  infant,  as  well  as  that  of 
his  brothers  and  sisters  was  left  to  his 
widowed  mother. 

When  the  boy  was  twelve  years  old 
he  entered  a  boat  on  the  Erie  Canal 
as  a  cabin  boy  and  twelve  years  later 
he  became  captain  of  the  boat  "Sham- 
rock." 


In  1828  he  married  Caroline  Whit- 
ing, the  daughter  of  Nathaniel  Whit- 
ing and  Mercey  Young,  and  while  they 
were  still  living  at  Whitehall,  their 
oldest  daughter  Jane  was  born.  A 
little  later  he  moved  to  Freedom,  New 
York,  where  three  other  daughters 
were  born.  It  was  at  this  point  that 
he  first  heard  the  Gospel  and  became 
a  member  of  the  L.  D.  S.  Church  in 
1834. 

From  a  letter  written  March  2,  1886 
by  Caroline  Nickerson  Hubbard  to  her 
daughter  Persia  Grover  Bunnell,  the 
following  is  taken:  "It  was  in  Free- 
dom, Cattaraugus  County,  New  York, 
where  he  and  his  wife  first  heard  and 
embraced    the    Gospel.     In    1834    the 


138 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Prophet  Joseph  and  Sidney  Rigdon 
were  the  ones  that  bore  the  message 
to  them  and  baptized  Brother  Grover 
and  some  others.  He  removed  to  Kirt- 
land  and  helped  to  build  the  Temple 
there. 

Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  Kirtland, 
Brother  Grover  called  on  the  Prophet. 
As  he  knocked  at  the  door  the  Prophet 
opened  it  and  said,  putting  out  his 
hand:  'How  do  you  do,  Brother  Gro- 
ver. If  God  ever  sent  a  man  he  sent 
you.  I  w^ant  to  borrow^  every  dollar 
you  can  spare  for  immediate  use. 
Brother  Grover  entered  the  house  and 
conversed  with  the  Prophet  about  the 
situation,  offering  to  let  Joseph  have 
what  money  he  needed.  Brother  Jo- 
seph accepted  the  offer  and  told  Broth- 
er Grover  to  look  around  and  find  a 
location  that  suited  him  for  a  home 
and  then  return,  when  the  money  he 
had  advanced  would  be  returned  to 
him.  In  a  short  time  the  place  was 
selected,  but  Brother  Grover  refused 
to  receive  back  his  money,  saying,  'I 
have  sufficient  for  my  needs  without 
it.'  From  that  day  the  devotion  of 
Thomas  Grover  to  Joseph  Smith  never 
wavered." 

On  Feb.  4,  1841,  when  the  Nauvoo 
Legion  was  organized  with  Joseph 
Smith  as  lieutenant-general,  Thomas 
Grover  was  chosen  as  an  aide-de-camp 
on  the  general's  staff  and  on  Jan.  28, 
1842,  he  was  appointed  one  of  his  body 
guards. 

When  Joseph  was  kidnapped  by  Wil- 
son and  Reynolds,  Brother  Grover  was 
one  of  the  number  who  rescued  him, 
also  when  Joseph  was  imprisoned  at 
Rock  Island  his  release  was  effected 
by  Thomas  Grover  and  Stephen,  Mark- 
ham.  During  his  lifetime  the  Prophet 
gave  him  a  sword  which  has  been  a 
precious  heirloom  in  the  family  and 
which  is  now  in  the  hall  of  relics  at 
the   State  Capital   of  Utah. 

During  the  years  from  1840  to  June, 
1844,  Brother  Grover  was  sent  on  three 
missions  through  the  states  of  Michi- 
gan, New  York  and  southern  Canada. 


In  June,  1844,  while  doing  mis- 
sionary service  near  Kalamazoo,  Mich- 
igan, he  was  warned  in  a  dream  to  re- 
turn to  Nauvoo.  He  hesitated  about 
the  matter  until  the  warning  was  re- 
peated the  third  time.  Then  he  awoke 
his  companion,  a  Brother  Wilson,  and 
they  got  up,  made  it  a  matter  of  pray- 
er and  were  told  to  go  at  once  to  Nau- 
voo. They  did  so,  taking  the  shortest 
route  possible,  and  arrived  at  Carth- 
age just  after  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  and  his  brother  Hy- 
rum.  Hurrying  forward,  they  over- 
took the  company  with  the  bodies  and 
accompanied  them  to  Nauvoo,  where 
Brother  Thomas  was  requested  to  as- 
sist in  the  preparation  of  the  bodies 
for  burial.  During  that  service,  at  the 
request  of  Emma  Smith,  he  cut  a  lock 
from  the  Prophet's  hair  which  she  di- 
vided with  him. 

In  October,  1840,  Brother  Grover's 
wife,  Caroline  Whiting,  died,  leaving 
six  little  girls,  Jane,  Emmeline,  Mary, 
Adeline,  Caroline  and  Eliza  Ann;  the 
baby,   Emma,  died. 

On  Feb.  20,  1841,  he  married  Caro- 
line Eliza  Nickerson  Hubbard,  widow 
of  Marshall  Hubbard.  She  was  the 
mother  of  Persia  Grover,  born  Dec.  27, 
1841,  and  Marshall  Grover,  born  Sept. 
27,  184G.  This  wife  Caroline  wrote  in 
her  journal  "'that  the  principle  of  plu- 
ral marriage  was  taught  by  the  Proph- 
et Joseph  Smith,  that  her  husband, 
Thomas  Grover,  believed  and  accepted 
that  law,  and  that  on  Dec.  17,  1844, 
he  married  Hannah  Tupper,  daughter 
of  Silas  Tupper,  and  Hannah  Ladd,  as 
a  plural  wife.  The  first  child  of  that 
union,  Thomas,  Jr.,  was  born  Nov.  17, 
1845,  in  Nauvoo,  111." 

In  December,  1845,  they  had  their 
endowments  in  the  Nauvoo  Temple 
and  their  sealings  on  Jan.  20,  1846. 
Just  before  they  were  driven  out  ol 
Nauvoo,  Brother  Grover  also  married 
Laduska  Tupper,  a  sister  of  Hannah. 
Feb.  8,  1846,  this  family  along  with 
many  others,  left  their  comfortable 
homes  and  started  the  long  trek  across 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


139 


Iowa   on   the  way   tow  id   the   Rocky 
Mountains. 

When  they  were  crossing  the  Mis- 
sissippi River  on  a  flatboat,  the  boat 
commenced  to  sink  because  of  a  plank 
being  stamped  off  by  oxen  that  were 
being  led  behind  the  wagons.  In  try- 
ing to  loosen  the  oxen,  Brother  Gro- 
ver  had  got  off  the  boat  and  was  down 
the  stream  some  little  distance  when 
he  saw  that  only  the  covers  of  the 
wagons  were  above  the  water.  Being 
an  expert  swimmer  he  soon  reached 
the  boat  and  tearing  the  covers  loose 
he  told  the  folks  "not  to  move  an  inch 
and  that  not  a  hair  of  their  heads 
should  be  harmed."  Hannah  held  her 
ten-weeks-old  baby  on  her  shoulder  to 
keep  his  head  above  water  and  the 
little  three-year-old  Persia  cried, 
"Lord,  save  my  little  heart."  For  four 
months  they  traveled  before  they 
reached  Council  Bluffs,  July  23,  1846. 
Brother  Grover  at  once  began  to  pre- 
pare for  winter.  He  went  down  into 
Missouri  and  bought  a  load  of  fresh 
pork  which  he  sold  for  enough  corn- 
meal  to  last  the  family  all  winter. 
Later  he  was  appointed  butcher  for 
the  entire  camp  and  "in  that  capac- 
ity he  killed  and  cut  up,  without  any 
help  except  that  of  his  own  family, 
one  or  two  beeves  every  day  besides 
many  hogs." 

When  the  plan  came  up  to  organize 
the  first  company  of  Pioneers,  Thomas 
Grover  was  one  of  the  first  to  join 
with  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  help 
to  effect  that  organization.  Leaving 
his  family  at  Winter  Quarters  to  fol- 
low with  the  season's  emigration,  he 
himself  set  out  with  the  Pioneer  com- 
pany. 

When  the  company  reached  the 
north  fork  of  the  Platte  River,  it  was 
necessary  to  build  a  ferry  to  carry 
the  wagons  across.  Brother  Grover 
was  appointed  to  supervise  the  con- 
struction of  such  a  ferry  and  to  take 
charge  of  operating  the  same.  He  se- 
lected ten  men  to  go  for  timbers  with 
him  and  they  got  out  two  large  trees, 


hewed  them  out  canoe  fashion  and 
lashed  them  together  to  make  the 
raft.  After  ferrying  the  pioneer  com- 
pany across,  they  also  took  over  a 
large  company  of  Oregon  emigrants, 
for  which  they  were  paid  in  provisions 
and  foodstuff,  which  was  a  great  bless- 
ing to  the  weary  travelers.  Sufficient 
food  was  received  to  last  the  entire 
company  twenty  days. 

After  this  crossing  had  been  suc- 
cessfully made,  Pres.  Young  and  his 
counselors  appointed  Thomas  Grover 
and  eight  other  ferrymen  and  one 
blacksmith  to  remain  at  the  ferry  and 
attend  to  the  crossing  of  the  on-coming 
emigrants  as  well  as  the  later  com- 
panies of  the  Mormon  Pioneers.  They 
remained  at  the  Platte  until  the  wa- 
ter went  down  and  then  started  back 
along  the  trail  to  meet  their  families. 
They  ran  out  of  provisions  at  one  time 
and  for  three  days  had  only  one 
skunk  for  food,  then  coming  to  an  In- 
dian camp,  they  were  given  an  abun- 
dance of  buffalo  meat.  They  met  the 
company  with  whom  their  families 
were  traveling  and,  joining  with  them, 
they  arrived  in  the  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
Oct.  2,  1847,  with  Charles  C.  Rich's 
company. 

The  first  winter  was  spent  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  but  the  following  spring 
they  moved  to  Duel  creek,  or  what  is 
now  known  as  Centerville.  One  year 
later  they  moved  to  Farmington.  That 
season  Brother  Grover  raised  three 
hundred  bushels  of  wheat,  in  spite 
of  the  ravages  of  the  crickets,  which 
the  family  fought  desperately  to  keep 
them  from  eating  all  of  the  crop.  This 
they  did  by  digging  a  ditch  around 
the  field  and  filling  it  with  water  and 
then  walking  along  the  banks  and 
killing  the  crickets  with  switches  as 
they  attempted  to  jump  across. 

In  the  fall  of  1848,  as  he  and  about 
thirty  other  men  were  starting  for 
California,  he  was  asked  to  use  his  in- 
fluence with  this  company  (himself 
included)  to  pay  for  five  hundred  head 
of  Texas  cattle  which  had  been  bar- 


140 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


gained  for  and  brought  to  Utah  to 
help  keep  the  Mormons  from  starva- 
tion. This  they  did,  by  paying  four 
dollars  a  head  for  them  after  the  men 
had  earned  it  in  California.  At  this 
time  Pres.  Young  also  appointed 
Brother  Grover  to  settle  up  the  ac- 
counts and  business  connected  with 
the  Saints  who  had  come  around  Cape 
Horn  with  the  ship  "Brooklyn."  This 
responsibility  he  also  accomplished 
successfully. 

He  worked  in  the  gold  mines  for  a 
year  and  during  that  time  he  collected 
about  $20,000  in  gold  dust  from  the 
California  members  of  the  Church  and 
turned  it  into  the  tithing  fund  of  the 
Church.  In  addition  to  this,  on  the 
return  home,  he  was  chosen  captain 
of  a  rich  company  of  Mormons  return- 
ing to  Utah,  when  by  his  influence  and 
example  the  company  put  into  the 
hands  of  the  Church  leaders  in  tith- 
ing and  loans  such  a  generous  contri- 
bution of  gold  dust  that  Pres.  Young 
putting  his  hands  on  Brother  Grover's 
shoulders  said,  "Brother  Grover,  if 
every  Latter-day  Saint  would  do  as 
you  have  done  there  would  be  no  need 
of  a  tithing  among  this  people."  (From 
the  Journal  of  his  wife,  Hannah.) 

In  the  spring  of  1850  Brother  Gro- 
ver took  his  family  and  went  back 
across  the  plains  to  Iowa  to  buy  cattle. 
On  the  way  he  met  Aunt  Lydia  Knight. 
She  was  very  destitute  and  had  no 
team  to  take  her  to  Utah.  Brother 
Grover  gave  her  a  yoke  of  cattle,  cloth- 
ing and  food  to  last  her  until  a  crop 
could  be  raised.  When  the  Grover  fam- 
ily arrived  in  Iowa  they  settled  on 
Mosquito  Creek,  and  Brother  Grover 
went  into  Missouri  and  bought  150 
cows,  ten  yoke  of  oxen  and  some  young 
cattle.  They  decided  to  stay  there  for 
the  winter  so  that  made  it  possible 
for  his  wife  Hannah  to  go  back  to 
New  Hampshire  to  get  her  mother. 
During  the  winter  Pres.  Jedediah  M. 
Grant  came  to  see  them  and  because 
of  ill  health  he  remained  with  them 
most   of  the   winter.     When   he   was 


ready  to  return  to  the  Valley,  Brother 
Grover  gave  him  a  team  of  horses  and 
a  light  spring  wagon  that  he  had 
bought  for  the  purpose  of  bringing 
Grandmother  Tupper  in  to  join  the 
body  of  the  saints.  In  the  spring  of 
1853  Brother  Grover  and  his  family 
returned  to  the  Salt  Lake  Valley 
bringing  150  cows  with  him.  This  en- 
tire journey  to  and  from  Iowa  was 
made  by  the  family  traveling  alone  and 
without  accident.  Brother  Grover  was 
a  splendid  marksman  and  so  was  able 
to  provide  his  family  with  buffalo  meat 
and  wild  game. 

After  his  return  he  again  settled  in 
Farmington.  The  year  of  the  grass- 
hopper depredation  he  had  plowed  his 
land  in  the  fall  and  during  a  warm 
spell  in  February  he  planted  his  wheat. 
It  came  on  early  and  was  ready  for 
harvesting  before  tne  grasshoppers 
got  so  bad,  while  the  late  grain  was 
nearly  all  eaten  by  them. 

That  season  he  harvested  seven  hun- 
dred bushels  of  wheat  which  would 
have  brought  five  dollars  a  bushel  on 
the  public  market,  but  Brother  Gro- 
ver loaned  and  sold  every  bushel  of  it, 
except  enough  for  his  own  family,  for 
the  tithing  office  price  of  two  dollars 
a  bushel. 

At  this  time  Sister  Brown,  a  widow, 
sent  her  boy  to  ask  Brother  Grover  to 
sell  her  a  little  flour,  just  a  few 
pounds.  Brother  Grover  sent  his  son 
to  fill  a  grain  sack  full  of  flour  and 
put  it  on  the  boy's  wagon.  The  flus- 
tered youth  asked  how  much  a  whole 
sack  of  flour  would  cost,  adding  that 
he  had  only  a  little  money.  To  which 
Brother  Grover  replied,  "I  do  not  sell 
flour  to  widows  and  fatherless  chil- 
dren." As  the  sack  was  placed  upon 
the  wagon  the  happy  boy  drove  away 
in  tears.  In  1856  two  girls  from  Eng- 
land, Emma  and  Elizabeth  Walker,  ar- 
rived in  the  Valley  with  one  of  the 
handcart  companies.  Later  these  girls 
became  wives  of  Thomas  Grover  and 
both  of  them  reared  large  families. 

The  "Big  House"as  the  family  home 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


141 


was  called  was  built  in  1856  and  is 
still  standing  in  a  good  state  of  re- 
pair, on  the  main  street  in  Farm- 
ington. 

Brother  Grover  served  three  terms 
in  the  Utah  Legislature,  part  of  the 
time  being  during  its  session  in  Fill- 
more. He  was  also  Probate  Judge  of 
Davis  County. 

During  the  construction  of  the  Cot- 
tonwood Canyon  canal  he  contrib- 
uted twenty-five  young  cows  for  the 
purpose  of  transporting  the  granite 
blocks  for  the  erection  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple. 

In  1861  he  sent  a  driver,  wagon  and 
a  yoke  of  oxen  to  the  Missouri  River 
to  help  bring  in  the  poor  emigrating 
saints.  He  continued  this  practice  each 
year  as  long  as  teams  were  being  sent 
back.  In  1863  his  son  Thomas  was 
driver  of  the  team. 

When  the  Indians  fell  upon  the  Mor- 
mon colony  near  Salmon  River,  Idaho, 
he  fitted  out  and  sent  a  man  with  rid- 
ing horse,  pack  animal  and  provisions 
to  those  left  helpless  and  in  distress. 
He  contributed  half  the  ground  for 
the  Farmington  meeting  house  and 
boarded  the  men  free  of  charge  during 
its  construction. 

Brother  Grover  was  ordained  a  High 
Councilman  in  Kirtland,  Jan.  13,  1836, 
under  the  hands  of  Joseph  and  Hyrum 
Smith  and  Sidney  Rigdon,  Brother 
Rigdon  being  the  spokesman.  Shortly 
afterward  he  moved  to  Far  West,  Mis- 
souri, and  served  in  the  same  capac- 
ity there  and  also  on  the  banks  of  the 
Missouri  river  among  the  scattered 
saints.  He  was  called  by  revelation 
to  be  a  member  of  the  High  Council 
in  Nauvoo.  (Doctrine  and  Covenants 
Section  24,  page  445).  This  calling  did 
not  cease  at  Nauvoo,  but  continued 
on  into  Utah  at  the  request  of  Pres. 
Young.  He  served  as  a  missionary  in 
the  Eastern  States  during  1874-1875, 
and  visited  his  old  home  and  kindred 
on  that  occasion. 

Brother  Grover's  word  was  as  good 
as  his  bond.    A  common  saying  with 


him  was,  "A  debt  can  never  be  out- 
lawed; a  dollar  is  due  until  it  is  paid. 
If  I  were  going  to  be  hanged  I  should 
go  on  time." 

During  the  crusade  of  the  early  80s, 
as  he  was  returning  home  from  Nephi, 
U.  S.  Marshal  Dyer  boarded  the  train. 
With  a  sporting  twinkle  in  his  eye, 
his  son  Joel  came  up  to  him  and  said: 
"Father,  Marshal  Dyer  is  on  the  train, 
shall  I  introduce  you  to  him?  You 
might  arrange  a  compromise  with 
him."  "What,"  said  the  father,  "com- 
promise with  the  devil?     Never!" 

Another  time  a  deputy  marshal 
came  to  his  home  to  serve  a  writ  on 
him  for  polygamy.  When  the  man 
appeared  at  the  door  and  announced 
that  he  had  a  writ  to  serve.  Brother 
Grover  shouted  in  his  sonorous  voice, 
"Read  it.  Read  it."  The  officer  fum- 
bled in  his  pocket  for  the  paper,  but 
in  his  excitement  could  not  find  it. 
At  the  repeated  command,  "Read  it," 
he  turned  and  fled  from  the  house  in 
terror.  That  warrant  was  never  served. 

At  the  time  of  his  death  there  were 
less  than  $200  in  obligations  standing 
against  him,  and  not  a  dollar's  worth 
of  his  property  had  ever  been  mort- 
gaged. 

At  a  reunion  of  the  family  held  in 
Parker,  Idaho,  July  22,  1902,  his 
daughter  Emmeline  Grover  Rich  said, 
"My  father  was  loved  by  all  who  knew 
him.  He  never  spoke  evil  of  any- 
one; he  did  not  boast,  and  he  did  not 
take  honor  unto  himself.  Many  times 
he  has  divided  his  last  meal  with  a 
sufferer.  His  word  was  as  good  as 
his  bond.  He  could  neither  be  bought 
nor  sold.  He  was  incapable  of  a  little 
mean  or  treacherous  trick.  Not  one 
of  his  children  has  apostatized." 

At  the  death  of  his  wife  Caroline, 
in  1840,  the  kindred  of  Brother  Gro- 
ver wrote  to  him  from  New  York  to 
bring  his  six  little  children  home  to 
them.  The  distracted  father  decided 
to  do  it  and  so  told  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph of  his  intentions.  Brother  Joseph 
was  at  the  time  making  preparations 


142 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


for  a  somewhat  extended  absence  from 
home  himself,  and  so  said  to  Brother 
Grover,  "You  are  not  to  do  anything 
of  the  kind.  I  want  you  to  stay  here 
and  take  care  of  my  family  while  I 
am  away."  Brother  Grover  granted 
his  request  and  his  children  often  re- 
lated how  they  had  seen  their  father 
load  up  his  wagon  with  food  and  pro- 
visions and  take  it  to  Emma  Smith 
and  her  family. 

About  the  last  Sunday  in  the  life 
of  Thomas  Grover  he  attended  the 
sacrament  meeting  in  Farmington 
Ward.  As  the  amen  was  spoken  and 
the  people  were  about  to  move,  Broth- 
er Thomas  suddenly  raised  his  hand 
and  said,  "Wait  a  minute,  Bishop." 
Then  he  added,  that  he  could  not  go 
home  until  he  had  borne  testimony 
that  the  Gospel  was  true  and  that  Jo- 
seph Smith  was  a  true  Prophet  of 
God.  All  during  his  late  years  he 
seemed  to  feel  that  his  special  mis- 
sion was  to  testify  to  the  divine  mis- 
sion of  Joseph  Smith. 

On  Thursday,  Feb.  20,  1886,  Thomas 
Grover  passed  to  the  Great  Beyond, 
leaving  four  wives  and  26  living  chil- 
dren to  continue  his  work. 

GROVER,  Thomas„  Jr.,  a  Utah  Pio- 
neer of  1847,  was  born  Nov.  17,  1845, 
in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  a  son  of  Thomas 
Grover  and  Hannah  Tupper.  During 
the  exodus  from  Nauvoo  in  February, 
1846,  he  was  saved  from  drowning  by 
his  mother  holding  him  on  her  shoul- 
der as  the  ferry  boat  on  which  they 
were  crossing  the  Mississippi  river 
dipped  water  until  the  wagon  boxes 
were  full. 

He  came  with  his  parents  to  the  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  arriving  Oct.  2,  1847,  in 
Charles  C.  Rich's  company. 

In  the  spring  of  1848  he  located  in 
Centerville,  and  later  moved  to  Farm- 
ington, Davis  Co.  He  accompanied  his 
parents  back  to  Iowa  in  1850,  and  re- 
turned in  1853,  having  walked  the 
greater  part  of  the  distance  and  help- 
ed to  drive  150  cows  from  the  Mis- 
souri  river  to  the   Salt  Lake  Valley. 


He  spent  most  of  his  boyhood  herding 
cattle  on  the  promontory  west  of  Brig- 
ham  City  and  farther  south  along  the 
lake  bottoms.  Many  times  he  assisted 
his  father  in  butchering  beef  and  cut- 


ting meat  in  pieces  weighing  from  ten 
to  twenty  pounds  each;  and  helped  to 
distribute  it  to  their  neighbors  in 
Farmington  for  Sunday  or  Christmas 
dinners. 

In  1861  he  drove  a  team  back  to  the 
States  in  Captain  Joseph  Home's  com- 
pany to  help  bring  in  the  poor  emi- 
grating saints.  The  teamsters  were 
five  months  on  the  road.  Brother  Gro- 
ver was  a  member  of  the  posse  under 
Robert  T.  Burton  who  broke  up  the 
Morrisite  camp  on  the  Weber  in  1862. 

In  the  fall  of  1864  he  accompanied 
George  Heiner  and  Wyman  Parker  to 
Morgan  County,  and  spent  the  Christ- 
mas holidays  with  the  family  of  Mar- 
tin Heiner.  On  the  10th  of  February, 
1865,  he  married  their  daughter,  Eliza- 
beth, being  sealed  in  the  Endowment 
House  by  Heber  C.  Kimball.  Their 
first  child,  Thomas  Martin  Grover,  was 
born  in  Morgan,  Nov.  27,  1866. 

Owing  to  the  grasshopper  depreda- 
tions in  Morgan  County  during  the 
summer  of  1868,  Brother  Grover  took 
his  wife  and  baby  and  went  to  Farm- 
ington to  work  on  the  threshing  ma- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


143 


chine.  There  his  second  child,  Evelyn 
Maria,  was  born.  Soon  after  the  Oc- 
tober conference  that  year  he  was 
called  to  settle  on  the  "Muddy,"  and 
thus  became  one  of  the  founders  of 
St.  Joseph,  Nevada.  The  "Muddy" 
Valley  at  that  time  constituted  a  part 
of  Utah.  On  the  journey  down  their 
mules  were  stolen  by  the  Indians,  leav- 
ing the  travelers  stranded  nearly  one 
hundred  miles  away  from  their  desti- 
nation, until  help  could  be  sent  to 
them.  They  loved  the  country,  and 
raised  wonderful  crops,  but  the  Indian 
troubles  and  the  excessive  taxes  of 
Nevada  impelled  President  Young  to 
release  the  colonists  from  their  mis- 
sion and  instruct  them  to  return  home 
or  go  elsewhere,  where  conditions  were 
more  favorable.  Brother  Grover  went 
back  to  Morgan,  and  spent  a  good  part 
of  the  time  in  1871  and  1872  in  the  En- 
dowment House  doing  baptismal  work 
for  his  dead  kindred  on  his  mother's 
line. 

He  moved  to  Nephi,  Juab  Co.,  in 
1872,  where  he  remained  until  August, 
1879,  when  he  again  returned  to  Mor- 
gan. During  his  sojourn  at  Nephi  he 
served  as  town  constable  and  worked 
at  blacksmithing  and  farming.  For 
three  years  he  presided  over  the 
Mound's  branch  of  the  Church.  In  1877 
he  and  his  mother  went  to  St.  George 
and  did  work  for  the  dead  in  the  tem- 
ple. At  that  time  he  married  Louisa 
Ann  Picton. 

In  1883  he  was  set  apart  by  William 
W.  Taylor  to  preside  over  the  35th 
Quorum  of  Seventy,  which  position 
he  held  with  honor  until  1910.  Shortly 
after  that  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest,  and  was  called  to  officiate  as 
an  ordinance  worker  in  the  Logan 
Temple,  where  he  rendered  very  faith- 
ful service,  which  especially  endeared 
him  to  Pres.  M.  W.  Merrill.  He  per- 
formed 9090  baptisms  in  that  Temple. 
In  1885  (May  7),  he  married  Ann  B. 
Saunders,  who  became  the  mother  of 
two  sons  and  one  daughter. 

Three  years  (1901  to  1904)  he  spent 


in  Rexburg,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  to 
which  place  his  older  children  had  re- 
moved. While  there  he  labored  as  a 
stone  mason,  helping  to  erect  the 
Rick's  Academy,  the  Rexburg  Central 
School  and  several  other  public  build- 
ings. He  also  did  extensive  building 
construction  in  Afton,  Wyoming.  In 
1880  and  1881  he  worked  as  overseer 
for  Grover,  McCune  &  Reed  in  rail- 
road construction  in  Colorado.  He  also 
helped  to  build  the  Utah  Central  Rail- 
road through  Juab  County. 

His  character  was  outstanding  for 
integrity,  honesty  and  true  charity. 
The  widow,  the  down-trodden  and  the 
missionary's  family  were  always  ob- 
jects of  his  special  care.  He  was  rig- 
idly punctual  in  all  his  affairs,  a  con- 
scientious worker,  a  faithful  observer 
of  the  Word  of  Wisdom,  extremely 
temperate  in  all  his  habits  and  true 
to  every  trust. 

He  was  the  father  of  six  sons  and 
thirteen  daughters,  all  faithful  Latter- 
day  Saints. 

Elder  Grover  died  May  24,  1931,  at 
the  home  of  his  daughter,  Hannah  G. 
Hegsted  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

HADFIELD,  William,  second  Bish- 
op of  the  Lehi  Third  Ward,  Lehi 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  June 
3,  1879,  at  Provo,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Samuel  Hadfield  and  Alice 
Baker.  Being  left  an  orphan  he  moved 
from  Provo  to  Lehi  in  December,  1889. 
He  was  baptized  in  1890  by  A.  M.  Fox, 
ordained  a  Deacon  by  W.  W.  Clark, 
and  ordained  an  Elder  by  Edward 
Southwick  in  June,  1902.  In  1902- 
1904  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States,  where  he  acted  as  president  of 
the  New  York  Conference  for  five 
months.  At  home  he  acted  as  super- 
intendent of  the  Lehi  Third  Ward 
Sunday  School  from  1904  to  1910.  In 
1910  he  was  chosen  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Bishopric  of  the  Lehi  Third 
Ward,  having  previously  been  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy,  in  1906,  by  Jonathan  G. 
Kimball.  In  1905  (June  28)  he  mar- 
ried Charlotte  Gough  in  the  Salt  Lake 


144 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Temple.  This  marriage  has  been  bless- 
ed with  eight  children,  viz:  Alice  Char- 
lotte, Dale  William,  Horace  James, 
Heber  Gough,  Leo  Arnold,  Glenn  Rob- 
ert, Donna  Mary,  and  Willa  Fay.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop,  Oct.  14,  1923, 
by  James  E.  Talxnage  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Lehi  Third  Ward, 
which  position  he  still  holds.  Brother 
Hadfield  was  the  first  and  only  Lat- 
ter-day Saint  to  represent  Utah  at  the 
National  Convention  of  Mail  Carriers 
in  September,  1913,  at  Evansville,  In- 
diana. 

HALES,  Jacob  Lehman,  Bishop  of 
the  Cedar  Valley  Ward,  (Lehi  Stake) 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  March  11, 
1864,  at  Enterprise,  Morgan  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Henry  William  Hales  and 
Sarah  Jane  McKinney.  He  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Cedar  Fort  when  eight 
years  old,  and  after  reaching  the  age 
of  thirteen  he  moved  to  Millard  Coun- 
ty, settling  near  Deseret.  He  was  edu- 
cated in  Cedar  Fort  and  Deseret. 

He  was  baptized  Aug.  15,  1880,  by 
David  K.  Crafts;  was  ordained  an  El- 
der, May  15,  1899,  by  Frank  Hinckley; 
ordained  a  Seventy,  May  17,  1899,  by 
Joseph  W.  McMurrin,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States  in  1899- 
1901,  laboring  in  West  Virginia.  In 
1901  (Oct.  16)  he  married  Mary  Ma- 
tilda Crafts  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple; 
two  children  have  blessed  this  mar- 
riage, viz:  Myron  Lehman  and  Kath- 
erina  Rebecca.  Brother  Hales  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest,  March  12,  1911, 
by  George  Cunningham.  He  served  as 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Cedar 
Fort  Sunday  School,  and  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  James  E.  Gam 
(being  set  apart  to  the  latter  position 
Feb.  25,  1912).  After  serving  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  Hacking  about 
one  year,  he  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
of  the  Cedar  Valley  Ward,  Jan.  22, 
1922,  being  ordained  to  that  office  Jan. 
29,  1922,  by  Apostle  Richard  R.  Ly- 
man, and  still  acts  as  Bishop  in  Cedar 
Valley.  Brother  Hales  is  a  farmer  by 
avocation. 


HATCH,  Ezra  Taft,  fifth  Bishop  of 
the  South  Bountiful  Ward,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  was  born  Dec.  29,  1871,  at  Boun- 
tiful, a  son  of  Orin  Hatch  and  Eliza- 
beth M.  Perry.  He  received  his  educa- 
tion at  Bountiful;  was  baptized  July 
4,  1880,  by  Wm.  Brown,  and  taking 
part  at  Church  activities  suited  to  his 
age,  was  ordained  a  Deacon,  but  soon 
afterwards  went  to  live  in  a  sheep 
camp  and  for  some  years  was  engaged 
in  the  sheep  and  cattle  business,  lo- 
cating in  Morgan,  Rich  and  Tooele 
counties  successively.  At  all  times, 
however,  he  endeavored  to  be  a  consis- 
tent member  of  the  Church,  and  on 
March  28,  1897,  was  ordained  an  El- 
der by  John  N.  Hatch.  Less  than  a 
month  afterwards  (on  April  23,  1897) 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Sey- 
mour B.  Young  and  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  the  Society  Islands,  for 
which  mission  he  left  his  home  on 
April  27,  1897,  and  returned  in  Octo- 
ber, 1900.  While  on  the  islands  he  la- 
bored mostly  on  the  Upper  Tuamotu 
group  and  also  on  the  Leeward 
Islands,  principally  on  Borobora,  Hua- 
hine  and  Mepete.  On  July  19,  1904, 
he  married  Edith  Folsom  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  Three  sons  and  three 
daughters  have  blessed  this  union, 
namely,  Ezra  Charles,  Julian  Wilder, 
Mark,  Ruth,  Leah  and  Edith.  Soon 
after  his  marriage,  while  residing  tem- 
porarily in  the  Argyle  Ward,  Rich  Co., 
Utah,  Brother  Hatch  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest,  Aug.  6,  1905,  by  Apostle 
Rudger  Clawson  and  set  apart  as  a 
member  of  the  Woodruff  Stake  High 
Council.  Returning  to  South  Bounti- 
ful in  December,  1905,  he  acted  as  a 
home  missionary  in  the  Davis  Stake, 
and  from  1908  to  1916  served  as  su- 
perintendent of  the  South  Bountiful 
Sunday  School.  He  was  chairman  of 
the  ward  Genealogical  Committee  and 
for  twenty  years  acted  as  a  ward 
teacher  with  great  fidelity.  In  Janu- 
ary, 1928,  he  succeeded  Bishop  Samuel 
C.  Howard  as  Bishop  of  the  South 
Bountiful    Ward,    a    position    he    still 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


145 


holds.  In  a  civil  capacity  Bishop  Hatch 
has  served  as  county  commissioner  for 
Davis  County  for  two  years,  director 
in  the  Deseret  Live  Stock  Company, 
president  of  the  town  board  of  Woods 
Cross  in  1935,  and  has  held  many  oth- 
er positions  of  honor  and  trust. 

He  has  followed  farming,  stock 
raising  and  dairying,  in  which  proj- 
ects he  has  had  much  success.  He  is 
known  for  his  integrity  and  fair  deal- 
ing. 

HEATON,  Charles  Carroll,  presi- 
dent of  the  Kanab  Stake  of  Zion,  was 
born  Dec.  4,  1880,  at  Cotton  Farm, 
Washington  County,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Jonathan  Heaton  and  Lucy  E.  Carroll. 
When  about  three  years  old  he  moved 
with  his  parents  to  Orderville,  where 
he  was  raised  and  attended  school.  He 
was  baptized  July  7,  1889,  by  Alvin  F. 
Heaton,  ordained  a  Deacon,  Feb.  6, 
1897,  by  Charles  W.  Carroll,  and  an 
Elder,  Nov.  28,  1900,  by  Edward  Car- 
roll. From  his  earliest  youth  he  took 
an  active  part  in  the  Orderville  Sun- 
day School,  acting  at  one  time  as  its 
superintendent  and  he  also  held  the 
positions  of  secretary  and  first  coun- 
selor in  the  ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He 
moved  to  the  Moccasin  farm  in  1900, 
soon  after  marrying  Margaret  Cox, 
Nov.  28,  1900,  in  the  St.  George  Tem- 
ple. This  mari'iage  has  been  blessed 
with  ten  children,  namely,  Charles 
Leonard,  Jennie,  Clifford  K.,  Richard, 
Keziah,  Jonathan  Grant,  Grace,  Mel- 
vin  Kelsey,  Margaret  Alice,  and  La- 
vina  Ann.  Prior  to  1900  President 
Heaton's  parents  had  located  at  Moc- 
casin Springs,  in  fact  when  the  Unit- 
ed Order  in  Orderville  was  dissolved 
and  the  property  previously  owned 
by  the  corporation  was  distributed,  the 
Heaton  family  received  as  their  por- 
tion the  Moccasin  Farm.  In  due  course 
of  time  some  of  the  family  moved  to 
other  parts  of  the  country  and  Jon- 
athan Heaton  and  his  sons  became  the 
sole  owners  of  the  Moccasin  Springs 
property.   After  the  death  of  Jonathan 


Heaton,  the  ranch  was  owned  by  his 
widow,  Mrs.  Lucy  E.  Heaton  and  her 
six  sons,  who  now  occupy  seven  beau- 
tiful homes  at  the  Moccasin  Springs 
and  constitute  the  entire  population 
of  the  Moccasin  Springs  Branch  of 
the  Church,  numbering  about  seventy 
souls.  Charles  C.  Heaton  was  appoint- 
ed president  of  the  branch  when  it  was 
first  organized.  He  held  that  position 
until  1913,  when  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States.  On 
that  occasion  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
On  his  mission  he  labored  eight 
months  in  the  South  Chicago  Branch 
(or  the  Roseland  Branch),  later  for 
eight  months  as  president  of  the  Wis- 
consin Conference  and  then  nine 
months  as  president  of  the  Manitoba 
Conference  in  Canada.  After  return- 
ing from  his  mission,  he  acted  as  pres- 
ident of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Ka- 
nab Stake  and  also  as  a  member  of 
the  High  Council.  These  positions  he 
held  until  Feb.  25,  1934,  when  he  was 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  stake. 
In  a  secular  capacity  President 
Heaton  has  acted  as  postmaster,  jus- 
tice of  the  peace  and  state  livestock 
inspector.  He  is  a  successful  farmer 
and  stock  raiser  and  has  from  his  early 
youth  exhibited  spiritual  and  civil 
leadership.  Both  in  Canada  and  the 
United  States  he  has  taken  an  active 
part  in  the  Boy  Scout  movement. 

HERRICK,  John  Lester,  president 
of  the  Wetsern  States  Mission,  from 
1908  to  1919,  was  born  in  Ogden,  Utah, 
June  2,  1868,  a  son  of  Lester  James 
Herrick,  and  Agnes  McQuarrie.  His 
boyhood  and  young  manhood  were 
spent  in  the  Second  Ward  of  Ogden, 
where  he  served  in  the  presidency  of 
the  Deacons'  and  Teachers'  Quorums, 
and  had  charge  of  the  Priests  under 
the  direction  of  Bishop  Robert  Mc- 
Quarrie. He  also  acted  as  secretary 
and  later  as  president  of  the  Young 
Men's  Mutual  Improvement  Associa- 
tion of  the  Ogden  Second  Ward,  pre- 
sided over  the  ward  choir  and  served 


Vol.  IV.  No.   10 


March   7,   193(> 


liC, 


I.ATTER-DAY   SAINT 


as    business    manager    of    the    Second 
Ward  Dramatic  Club  for  many  years. 


He  was  ordained  an  Elder  in  May, 
1894,  by  John  Scowcroft,  and  a  High 
Priest  in  1899  by  Apostle  Franklin  D. 
Richards.  In  1889  he  was  chosen  secre- 
tary of  the  Stake  Board  of  the  Young 
Men's  Mutual  Improvement  Associa- 
tion and  became  superintendent  of  said 
board  in  1899,  serving  in  that  capacity 
until  the  division  of  Weber  Stake  in 
1908.  Prior  to  that  he  was  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  for  five  years. 

In  the  fall  of  1908  he  was  called 
to  preside  over  the  Western  States 
Mission  with  headquarters  at  Denver, 
Colorado,  and  assumed  the  duties  of 
that  position,  Jan.  1,  1909.  During  his 
administration  he  built  the  present 
chapel  and  mission  home  at  Denver. 
After  being  released  in  July,  1919,  he 
acted  as  pi-esident  of  the  Denver 
Branch  in  1928-1934. 

In  1894  (June  1)  he  married  Jane 
Richards  West  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple, Apostle  Franklin  D.  Richards  per- 
forming the  ceremony.  This  union  has 
been  blessed  with  three  children, 
namely,  Josephine,  John  West,  and 
Lester  James. 

Brother  Herrick  started  work  as  an 


office  boy  in  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.  at  Ogden 
in  1885  and  remained  with  that  insti- 
tution for  five  years;  he  was  assistant 
bookkeeper  when  he  resigned  to  go 
to  the  First  National  Bank  of  Ogden 
as  bookkeeper.  Five  years  later  he 
was  appointed  assistant  postmaster  at 
Ogden,  which  position  he  occupied  for 
six  years.  He  resigned  to  join  the 
Boyle  Furniture  Company  as  secre- 
tary-treasurer, and  two  yeais  later  he 
entered  into  a  partnership  with 
George  J.  Kelly  as  "Kelly  &  Herrick 
Real  Estate  &  Insurance."  This  part- 
nership continued  for  five  years  or 
until  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
the  Western  States  in  1908.  After  be- 
ing released  from  his  mission,  he  re- 
mained in  Denver  with  his  family  and 
engaged  in  insurance  brokerage;  con- 
tinued in  that  line  until  he  received 
his  present  appointment  as  guide  in 
the  Church  Office  Building,  April  15, 
1936.  His  wife  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sept.  11,  1936,  at  the  age  of 
sixty-two,  following  an  operation. 

HILTON,  Eugene,  second  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  San  Francis- 
co Stake,  was  born  Nov.  12,  1889,  at 
Virgin  City,  Washington  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  Hugh 
Hilton  and  Maria 
Parker.  He  was 
baptized  on  his 
eighth  birthday 
anniversary  (Nov. 
12,  1897)  by  his 
father.  After  be- 
ing ordained  to 
the  offices  of  Dea- 
con and  Priest,  he 
was  ordained  an 
Elder  May  26, 
1912,  at  Hinckley, 
Utah,  by  John  C. 
Webb,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  23,  1926, 
by  Apostle  Richard  R.  Lyman  at 
Thatcher,  Arizona,  while  presiding 
over  the  Gila  College.  From  1912 
to  1914  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  during  which  time  he 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


14? 


presided  for  approximately  one  year, 
over  the  East  Pennsylvania  Confer- 
ence. Always  active  in  his  Church 
duties,  Brother  Hilton  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Granite  Stake  Sunday 
School  Board  from  1921  to  1922,  and 
as  a  member  of  the  General  Board  of 
Sunday  Schools  from  1922  to  1927.  In 
1924  he  moved  with  Jiis  family  to  Ari- 
zona to  work  in  the  college  at  Thatch- 
er. Three  years  later  he  moved  to 
Berkeley  to  attend  the  University  of 
California.  While  there  he  acted  as 
superintendent  of  the  Sunday  schools 
of  the  San  Francisco  Stake  from  1927 
to  1930,  when  he  was  called  into  the 
High  Council  of  the  San  Francisco 
Stake.  On  Nov.  16,  1930,  he  was  set 
apart  by  Apostle  George  Albert  Smith 
as  second  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  the  San  Francisco  Stake. 

After  returning  from  his  mission  he 
became  a  salesman  to  assist  himself 
through  the  Brigham  Young  Univer- 
sity. In  a  civil  capacity,  Elder  Hilton 
was  a  farmer  until  1914,  He  taught 
school  from  1917  to  the  present  time, 
acting  as  principal  of  the  L.  D.  S. 
Seminary  in  Lehi,  Utah  (an  organ- 
ization of  which  he  was  also  the 
founder),  principal  of  the  Blackfoot 
(Idaho)  Seminary,  instructor  at  the  L. 
D.  S.  University  from  1921  to  1924; 
instructor  and  secretary  of  the  Gila 
College  (Thatcher,  Arizona)  from  1924 
to  1925,  and  as  president  of  that  insti- 
tution from  1925  to  1927.  Then  re- 
moving to  California  in  June,  1927,  he 
spent  one  year  as  full  time  graduate 
student  and  then  accepted  a  position 
as  head  of  the  Social  Studies  Depart- 
ment of  the  Roosevelt  High  School  in 
Oakland,  California,  and  later  as  head 
of  the  Social  Studies  and  English  de- 
partments of  the  McClymonds  High 
School  in  Oakland. 

His  educational  studies  led  to  his 
receiving  the  following  degrees:  A.B. 
in  1919  from  the  Brigham  Young  Uni- 
versity at  Provo,  Utah;  M.  S.  in  1924 
from  the  University  of  Utah,  and  Ed. 
D,  in  1930  from  the  University  of  Cal- 


ifornia. While  attending  these  uni- 
versities he  became  prominent  in  an 
editorial  capacity,  being  editor  of  the 
B.  Y.  U.  "Banyan,"  author  of  the 
"Junior  College  Book  List,"  published 
by  the  University  of  California  Press 
in  1930,  also  by  appointment  of  the 
North  Central  Association,  author  of 
an  extensive  research  study  which 
produced  in  1932  the  "Evaluated  Pe- 
riod," Vol.  I,  page  56. 

In  1916  (Sept.  28),  Pres.  Hilton  mar- 
ried Ruth  Naomi  Savage  in  the  St. 
George  Temple,  This  union  has  been 
blessed  with  eight  children,  namely, 
Eugene  Savage,  Joseph  Roy,  Phyl 
Normington,  Theodore  Caldwell,  Lynn 
Mathers,  John  Levi,  George  Fayette 
and  Patricia  Ruth,  He  is  well  quali- 
fied for  the  position  which  he  holds, 
being  highly  respected  among  the  lead- 
ing men  of  San  Francisco  and  vicinity, 
and  is  always  ready  to  uphold  the 
principles  of  the  Gospel  among  his 
associates  and  friends, 

JACOBS,  Henry  Chariton,  jun.,  pres- 
ident of  the  North  Sanpete  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  March  15,  1876,  in 
Prattville,  Sevier  County,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Henry  Chariton  Jacobs  and  Su- 
sie Stringham.  With  his  parents  he 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City  when  two 
years  old  and  received  his  schooling 
in  the  Sugar  House  Ward  and  later 
in  the  Eighteenth  Ward  Seminary,  un- 
der the  tuition  of  Geo.  M.  Mumford. 
Young  Henry  was  baptized  by  his  fa- 
ther, March  15,  1884,  and  confirmed 
a  member  of  the  Church  by  Bishop 
Orson  F.  Whitney,  He  was  ordained 
successively  to  the  off'ices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Priest  and  Elder,  and  was 
ordained  a  Seventy,  March  27,  1896, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant,  In  1896-1898  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain,  la- 
boring in  the  Sheffield  Conference, 
part  of  the  time  as  conference  secre- 
tary. During  this  mission  he  baptized 
three  converts.  In  1902  (December 
17),  he  married  Alberta  Larsen  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple  and  moved  to 
Magrath,    Canada,   where    he   resided 


148 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


for  a  time.  On  March  27,  1903,  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  John 
W.  Taylor  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  John  P.  Anderson 
of  the  Raymond  Ward  of  the  Alberta 
Stake.  In  1909  he  returned  to  Utah 
and  engaged  in  the  mercantile  busi- 
ness at  Mount  Pleasant,  where,  contin- 
presided  over  the  Sunday  School  of 
the  Mount  Pleasant  South  Ward.  On 
Sept.  12,  1909,  he  was  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  Justis  Burt 
Seeley  of  the  Mount  Pleasant  North 
Ward,  and  on  July  16,  1911,  he  suc- 
ceeded Bishop  Seeley  as  Bishop  of  that 
ward,  in  which  position  he  served  un- 
til Sept.  16,  1926,  when  he  was  chosen 
as  a  High  Councilor  in  the  North  San- 
pete Stake  of  Zion.  On  June  16,  1929, 
he  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  North  Sanpete 
Stake,  which  position  he  occupied  un- 
til June  21,  1936,  when  he  was  set 
apart  by  George  F.  Richards  as  presi- 
dent of  said  stake,  succeeding  Soren 
M.  Nielsen  in  that  position.  Brother 
and  Sister  Jacobs  have  a  family  of 
three  sons  and  one  daughter,  namely, 
James  Larsen,  Henry  C.  (3rd),  Bry- 
ant  Stringham   and   Dorothy. 

President  Jacobs  is  of  pioneer  an- 
cestry and  inherits  the  sturdy  virtues 
of  faith,  coui-age  and  perseverance 
which  characterized  that  noble  band 
of  empire  builders  of  the  West. 

JACOBSON,  Oliver  Karl,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  mission  field,  was 
born  Sept.  16,  1897,  at  Randolph,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Oliver  Jacobson  and  Emma 
Jane  Thornock.  He  was  baptized  June 
2,  1906,  by  F.  Hunsaker,  ordained  a 
Deacon  Dec.  11,  1911,  by  P.  E.  Dun- 
ford,  ordained  a  Priest  Nov.  27,  1915, 
by  his  father  and  ordained  an  Elder 
Nov.  26,  1921,  by  Clarence  Aston.  On 
Dec.  1,  1921,  he  was  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  New  Zealand  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun.  In  June,  1924,  while  still 
laboring  as  a  missionary,  he  was 
thrown  from  a  horse  and  kicked  in  the 
head.  He  was  able  to  remount  and  ride 
to   an  emergency   hospital,  where   he 


x-eceived  treatment,  but  the  following 
day  was  transferred  to  the  hospital 
at  Neunka,  where  he  remained  for 
a  month,  until  he  died,  July  18,  1924. 
His  remains  were  sent  to  his  parents 
in  Idaho,  where  funeral  services  were 
held  at  Bancroft,  Sept.  23,  1924,  at- 
tended by  Elders  Rufus  K.  Hardy  and 
Benjamin  Goddai'd,  representing  the 
Maori  Missionary  Society. 

JENSEN,  Hans  Peter,  presiding 
Elder  of  Mantua  Ward,  Box  Elder 
County,  Utah,  was  born  in  Ny  Heg- 
ested,    Sjalland,    Denmark,    March    3, 


1815,  and  learned  the  blacksmith  trade 
when  a  very  young  man.  He  joined 
a  religious  movement  in  Copenhagen 
in  1834,  and  became  a  member  of  a 
faction  of  the  Lutheran  Church,  called 
"Kirketroende."  In  1839,  when  the 
first  Baptist  missionaries  came  from 
Hamburg  to  Copenhagen,  he  became 
fascinated  by  the  Bible  doctrines 
taught  by  them,  was  shortly  after- 
wards baptized  and  made  a  member 
of  the  first  Baptist  church  in  Scan- 
dinavia. Shortly  afterwards  he  went 
as  a  Baptist  missionary  to  the  city  of 
Aalborg,  Jutland,  where  he  succeeded 
in  raising  up  a  branch  of  that  church, 
of  which  he  was  appointed  president, 
or  "Forstander."  About  the  same  time 
he  laid  the  foundation  of  a  flourishing 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


149 


foundry  and  blacksmithing  business  in 
the  adjacent  town  of  Norre  Sundby,  in 
which  he  was  very  successful,  and 
soon  became  a  man  of  considerable 
means  and  influence. 

In  the  fall  of  1850,  Elder  Geo.  P. 
Dykes  arrived  in  Aalborg,  as  the  first 
"Mormon"  missionary  in  Jutland,  and 
began  to  preach  the  fulness  of  the 
Gospel.  Hans  Peter  Jensen  opposed 
him  at  first,  but  was  soon  convinced 
of  the  truth,  after  which  he  with  his 
wife  and  six  others  were  baptized  Oct. 
27,  1850,  as  the  first  fruits  of  Elder 
Dykes'  labors  in  Aalborg.  A  flourish- 
ing branch  sprang  into  existence  in 
Aalborg  a  month  later,  mostly  made 
up  from  persons  who  formerly  were 
Baptists  and  Hans  P.  Jensen  was  or- 
dained a  Priest  and  appointed  to  pre- 
side over  it.  Almost  immediately  after 
this  a  severe  persecution  arose  against 
the  Saints,  among  whom  Brother  Jen- 
sen was  the  main  object  of  the  people's 
hatred  and  his  life  was  sought  several 
times.  Upon  one  occasion  the  mob 
forced  him  to  flee  from  his  home  and 
family,  and  run  about  20  miles,  to  a 
place  where  he  could  escape  on  a 
steamer  bound  for  Copenhagen.  Sub- 
sequently he  spent  most  of  his  time 
in  the  missionary  field  and  traveled 
extensively  in  Denmark  and  Norway. 
He  organized  the  two  first  branches 
of  the  Church  in  the  latter  country 
and  also  organized  the  first  branch 
in  the  dukedom  of  Schleswig,  which 
at  that  time  belonged  fo  the  Danish 
monarchy.  He  was  constantly  sub- 
jected to  severe  persecution,  and  at 
one  time  very  roughly  handled  on  the 
island  of  Bornholm.  At  a  conference, 
held  in  Copenhagen  in  February,  1852, 
he  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a 
High  Priest  by  Erastus  Snow  and  ap- 
pointed a  counselor  to  Elder  John  E. 
Forsgren,  who  at  the  same  time  was 
appointed  president  of  the  Scandi- 
navian Mission  pro  tem.  He  subse- 
quently occupied  the  same  position 
to  Elder  Willard  Snow,  who  was  sent 
from  England  to  take  charge  of  the 
Church   in   Scandinavia.    When   Pres. 


Willard  Snow  took  sick  in  August, 
1853,  and  started  for  England,  Elders 
Hans  P.  Jensen  and  Peter  O.  Hansen 
accompanied  him  and  were  with  him 
on  the  steamer  when  he  died  and  his 
body  buried  in  the  North  Sea. 

Elder  Jensen  continued  his  mission- 
ary career  until  the  fall  of  1853,  when 
with  his  family  he  emigrated  to  Utah, 
after  he  had  sold  his  valuable  factory 
in  Norre  Sundby  and  spent  the  means 
derived  therefrom  for  the  benefit  of 
the  mission  and  the  emigration  of  the 
poor.  Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  Utah 
he  located  in  Brigham  City,  being  one 
of  the  first  settlers  of  that  place.  In 
the  spring  of  1863,  about  a  dozen  Dan- 
ish families  were  called  by  the  Church 
authorities  to  settle  in  the  "Little  Val- 
ley," three  miles  east  of  Brigham  City, 
in  charge  of  Hans  Peter  Jensen.  The 
place  was  named  Mantua  after  Pres. 
Lorenzo's  Snow's  birthplace  in  Ohio. 
Here  Elder  Jensen  presided  until  1877. 
Dui'ing  that  time  he  had  i-etained  his 
home  in  Brigham  City  where  he  re- 
sided until  his  death,  May  29,  1883.  He 
filled  numerous  positions  of  trust  and 
responsibility  and  was  devoted  in  sup- 
porting Pres.  Snow  all  through  the 
period  of  the  Brigham  City  co-oper- 
ative movement.  He  left  a  large  fam- 
ily, having  35  sons  and  daughters. 

JOHNSON,  John  Edward,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  San 
Francisco  Stake 
of  Zion,  was  born 
Oct.  2,  1890,  in 
Murray,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  Johnson 
and  Edla  Wilhel- 
mina  Lundell.  His 
parents  being 
staunch  Latter- 
day  Saints,  the 
boy,  John  Edwax'd, 
was  trained  in  the 
principles  of  the 
Gospel  from  his 
early  youth  and 
was   baptized    November   6,   1898,   by 


150 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Robert  L.  Campbell,  and  subsequent- 
ly ordained  successively  to  the  offi- 
ces of  Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest  and 
Elder.  When  a  few  months  old,  he 
moved  with  his  parents  from  Murray 
to  Benjamin,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  where 
he  received  a  common  school  educa- 
tion, graduating  from  the  eighth  grade 
in  the  spring  of  1906.  At  the  age  of 
seventeen,  he  entered  the  High  School 
Department  of  the  Brigham  Young 
University  at  Provo,  graduating  from 
that  school  in  1911.  He  then  entered 
upon  college  work  in  the  Brigham 
Young  University,  graduating  with 
the  degree  of  A.  B.  in  the  spring  of 
1915.  During  his  last  year  of  study 
there  he  functioned  as  president  of 
the  student  body.  In  1912-1913  he 
taught  school  in  Hinckley,  Utah,  and 
later  acted  as  principal  of  the  Snow- 
flake  Stake  Academy  at  Snowflake, 
Arizona.  After  moving  to  Berkeley, 
California,  in  the  fall  of  1917,  he  en- 
tered the  School  of  Jurisprudence  of 
the  University  of  California,  gradu- 
ating with  the  degree  of  Juris  Doctor 
in  the  spring  of  1920.  After  being  ad- 
mitted to  the  bar  in  1920,  he  com- 
menced the  practice  of  law  in  Provo, 
Utah,  being  associated  with  Alfred 
August  Booth  and  Isaac  E.  Brockbank. 
Leaving  Provo  in  December,  1921,  he 
became  a  title  examiner  in  the  Feder- 
al Land  Bank  of  Berkeley,  at  Berke- 
ley, California.  He  became  attorney 
for  said  bank  in  August,  1922,  and 
attorney  for  the  Federal  Intermediate 
Credit  Bank  of  Berkeley  upon  its  or- 
ganization in  1923.  Resigning  these 
positions  in  August,  1926,  he  became 
attorney  for  the  Pacific  Coast  Joint 
Stock  Land  Bank  of  San  Francisco 
and  Mercantile  Mortgage  Company.  In 
1931  he  became  a  member  of  the  law 
firm  of  Johnson,  Ruggeri  and  Harmon 
with  offices  in  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  Building.  In  1932,  Mr.  Ruggeri 
returned  to  Utah,  whereupon  the  firm 
became  known  as  Johnson  and  Har- 
mon. While  attending  the  University 
of  California,  Brother  Johnson  acted 


as  counselor  to  President  W.  Aird  Mac- 
donald  for  a  short  time  in  the  Oak- 
land Branch  of  the  Church.  When  the 
Berkeley  Branch  was  organized  in  No- 
vember, 1929,  he  became  the  branch 
president  and  served  in  that  capacity 
until  July  10,  1927,  when  the  San  Fran- 
cisco Stake  was  organized.  Upon  that 
occasion,  he  was  chosen  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  said  stake, 
which  position  he  held  until  the  stake 
was  divided  and  Oakland  Stake  was 
organized,  effective  Jan.  1,  1935.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  to  that  position  by  Apostle 
George  Albert  Smith  on  July  10,  1927. 

On  June  22,  1916,  )ie  married  Mamie 
Huish  (Mary  Elma  Huish),  daughter 
of  James  William  and  Mary  Elizabeth 
Fillmore  Huish,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple. This  union  has  been  blessed  with 
four  children,  namely,  Robert  Huish 
Johnson,  Marion  Huish  Johnson,  Car- 
olyn Huish  Johnson  and  Thomas  Huish 
Johnson.  On  June  13,  1933,  his  wife, 
Mamie,  passed  away  in  Berkeley, 
where  she  is  buried  in  the  Sunset 
Memorial  Cemetery.  On  Aug.  31, 1934, 
Elder  Johnson  married  Miss  Ethel  La 
Von  Brockbank,  daughter  of  Taylor 
Park  Brockbank  and  Sarah  LeChem- 
inant  Brockbank,  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,  of  which  union  there  has  been 
born  a  daughter. 

Elder  Johnson  is  a  man  of  affairs, 
and  with  his  study  and  natural  ability 
he  constitutes  an  important  asset  to 
the  Oakland  Stake  of  Zion. 

JONES,  Ezra  Benson,  an  active  El- 
der in  the  Church,  was  born  March  29, 
1856,  in  Provo,  Utah,  the  youngest  son 
of  James  W.  Jones  and  Sarah  Ann 
Mallerny.  Soon  after  his  birth  the 
family  moved  to  North  Bend  (later 
Fairview),  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  where 
they  assisted  to  establish  a  new  settle- 
ment, of  which  Brother  James  N. 
Jones  was  the  first  presiding  Elder. 
Little  Ezra  who  was  named  in  honor 
of  Apostle  Ezra  T.  Benson,  was  only 
ten  years  old  when  his  father  died, 
and  eight  months  after  that  his  broth- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


161 


er  Thomas  was  killed  by  Indians  dur- 
ing the  Black  Hawk  war.  Ezra  still 
remembers  the  horrors  of  that  period 
and  also  the  hardships  encountered  in 
getting  material,  with  which  to  build 
houses,  the  labor  of  digging  irrigation 
ditches  with  their  primitive  equipment 
and  the  many  discouragements  which 
the  pioneer  settlers  had  to  ovei'come. 
And  yet  he  insists  that,  on  account 
of  the  sincere  friendships  and  the  sim- 
ple amusements  in  which  all  engaged 
with  no  class  distinction,  he  still  re- 
gards those  days  as  the  happiest  of 
his  life.  Later,  Brother  Jones  en- 
gaged in  operating  saw  mills  and  had 
a  grocery  store  at  Millburn,  Sanpete 
Co.,  for  28  years.  In  1926  he  and  his 
family  moved  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
with  his  sons,  he  established  the  Jones 
Coal  and  Expansion  Joint  Company 
with  which  he  is  still  associated.  On 
May  23,  1894,  he  married  Sarah  Jane 
Housekeeper,  a  pioneer  girl  of  pioneer 
parents,  who  has  been  a  loyal  and  lov- 
ing helpmeet  to  him  and  has  become 
the  mother  of  twelve  children,  eight 
of  whom  were  present  on  the  occasion 
of  the  golden  wedding  of  Brother  and 
Sister  Jones,  May  23,  1934.  At  that 
time  there  were  25  grandchildren  alive. 

JONES,  James  Naylor,  a  Utah  pio- 
neer of  1849,  was  born  April  3,  1810, 
at  Baltimore,  Maryland.  He  was  re- 
siding in  Ohio  when  L.  D.  S.  mission- 
ary operations  were  commenced  in  that 
state.  Becoming  a  convei't  to  the  re- 
stored Gospel  he  participated  in  the 
early  activities  of  the  Church  in  Ohio, 
and  later  became  associated  with  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  acting  as  his 
body  guard  upon  many  occasions  in 
Missouri  and  Illinois.  Brother  Jones 
and  his  wife  were  the  only  members 
of  the  family  who  accepted  the  Gos- 
pel, the  others  being  bitterly  opposed 
to  "Mormonism."  While  living  in 
Nauvoo,  James  N.  Jones  and  his  wife 
(Sarah  Ann  Malerny  Jones)  suffered 
much  persecution  and  mob  violence, 
which  on  one  occasion  resulted  in  their 
house  being  burned  and  their  only  cow 


driven  off,  although  it  was  known  that 
Brother  Jones  had  a  family  of  little 
children  to  support.  After  being  driv- 
en from  Nauvoo,  Brother  Jones,  with 
many  of  the  exiled  saints,  located  at 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  where  he  remain- 
ed until  1849,  when,  crossing  the  plains 
with  an  ox  team  in  a  company  of  other 
emigrants,  he  arrived  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  the  fall  of  that  year. 
Soon  after  his  arrival  he  located  on 
Big  Cottonwood  Creek,  but  soon  after- 
wards moved  to  Provo,  Utah  Co.,  where 
he  was  called  to  act  as  a  counselor  in 
the  Utah  Stake  Presidency  in  1855. 

In  1859  he  moved  to  Sanpete  County 
to  assist  in  founding  a  settlement  on 
the  Sanpitch  River.  The  site  chosen 
was  called  North  Bend  because  the 
river  at  that  point  changes  its  course 
to  a  somewhat  southerly  direction. 
Here  the  settlei-s  quarried  rock  for  the 
erection  of  a  fort  as  a  protection 
against  Indians,  and  when  a  postof- 
fice  was  established,  the  name  of  the 
settlement  was  changed  to  Faii-view 
because  of  its  pleasant  location.  Elder 
Jones  was  the  first  presiding  Elder 
of  the  settlement,  and  under  his  direc- 
tion a  townsite  was  surveyed  and  city 
lots  distributed,  while  farming  land 
for  each  family  was  also  designated. 

Brother  and  Sister  Jones  raised  a 
lai-ge  family,  one  of  whom,  Thomas, 
was  killed  by  Indians  during  the 
Black  Hawk  war  while  on  picket 
guard.  Brother  Jones  died  at  Fair- 
view,  Aug.  14,  1865,  and  his  wife  died 
there  Feb.  14,  1886. 

LANGLOIS,  David  Richard,  first 
president  of  the  Burley  Stake  of  Zion, 
was  born  Jan.  28,  1874,  at  Huntsville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  George  Langlois  and 
Mary  Charlotte  Ohlson.  He  was  rear- 
ed to  manhood  in  Huntsville,  where 
he  completed  the  eighth  grade  in  the 
public  school.  He  then  attended  the 
Weber  Academy  one  year,  after  which 
he  attended  the  University  of  Utah, 
graduating  from  the  four  year  normal 
course  in  1897.  He  then  taught  school 
in   Weber  County  for  five  years.    He 


152 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


was  baptized  July  30,  1882,  by  Peter 
C.  Geertsen  and  ordained  an  Elder 
Jan,  29,  1899,  by  George  Green.  He 
served  as  first  counselor  in  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  at  Huntsville  in  1899-1900. 
From  1899  to  1901,  inclusive,  he  was 
a  member  of  the  Stake  Board  of  Re- 
ligion Classes  of  the  Weber  Stake  and 
acted  as  superintendent  from  1902  to 
1905,  when  he  moved  to  Acequia,  Ida- 


ho, where  he  opened  a  general  mer- 
chandise store.  A  branch  of  the 
Church  was  organized  in  Acequia  in 
April,  1906,  by  Pres.  Wm.  T.  Jack  of 
the  Cassia  Stake,  with  David  R.  Lang- 
lois  as  piesident.  He  was  also  made 
president  of  the  Elders'  Quorum, 
which  included  all  the  Elders  on  the 
Minnidoka  Project,  both  on  the  north 
and  south  sides  of  Snake  River.  In 
1909  he  sold  his  mercantile  business 
and  took  his  wife  and  four  children  to 
visit  his  wife's  relatives  in  England, 
she  having  emigrated  from  England 
in  1898,  after  having  endured  much 
persecution  on  account  of  her  religion. 
Returning  from  England  in  1910, 
Brother  Langlois  and  his  family  lo- 
cated in  Oakley,  Idaho,  where  he  or- 
ganized the  P^armers'  Commercial  and 
Savings  Bank,  of  which  he  was  cash- 
ier for  four  years.  In  1910  he  was 
made  a  member  of  the  Cassia  Stake 


Sunday  School  Board  and  in  1911  be- 
came stake  superintendent  of  Relig- 
ion Classes.  In  1914  he  sold  his  inter- 
ests in  Oakley  and  moved  to  Burley, 
Idaho,  entering  the  grocery  business. 

On  May  30,  1915,  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Pres.  Wm.  T.  Jack 
and  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the  Bur- 
ley  First  Ward,  being  ordained  to  that 
office  Jan.  25,  1916,  by  Apostle  Geo. 
F.  Richards.  On  July  27,  1919,  the  Cas- 
sia Stake  was  divided  and  the  Burley 
Stake  organized  with  Bishop  Langlois 
as  president.  He  was  set  apart  to  this 
office  by  Apostle  Melvin  J.  Balla'M 
on  the  date  mentioned. 

On  Feb.  8,  1899,  he  married  Edith 
Maude  Ellerby.  Eight  children  have 
been  born  of  this  union,  namely, 
Gladys  Edith,  David  Percy,  Charles 
Vernon,  Joseph  Alfred,  Annie  Wini- 
fred, George  Roland,  Richard  Ellerby 
and  Gordon  Ellerby.  Richard  died 
Dec.  26,  1926. 

At  present  Pres.  Langlois  is  en- 
gaged in  farming,  sheep  raising,  and 
real  estate,  loan  and  insurance  busi- 
ness. The  Burley  Stake,  under  tht^ 
direction  of  Pres.  Langlois,  is  pro- 
gressing and  the  members  are  actively 
engaged  in   the  work  of  the  Lord. 

MACDONALD,  Wallace  Aird,  jun.. 

president  of  the  San  Francisco  Stake 


of   Zion,   was   born   Jan.    10,   1887,   at 
Mesa.    Arizona,    the    son    of   Wallace 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


153 


Aird  Macdonald  and  Sarah  B.  Brun- 
dage,  and  a  grandson  of  Alexander  F. 
Macdonald,  the  first  president  of  the 
Maricopa  and  Juarez  stakes.  The  boy, 
who  was  known  as  "Wallie,"  was  bap- 
tized, March  7,  1895,  by  Warner  H. 
Allen.  After  being  active  in  his 
Church  duties  in  Arizona,  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder,  Sept.  28,  1905,  by 
Morris  C.  Phelps,  and  from  Oct.  15, 
1905,  to  Feb.  5,  1908,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  under  the  di- 
rection of  Pres.  Ben  E.  Rich,  where  he 
worked  in  the  mission  office  and  also 
labored  as  a  missionary  in  the  states 
of  Virginia,  Tennessee,  Kentucky  and 
Ohio.  He  was  active  in  Sunday  School, 
M.  I.  A.  and  Priesthood  organizations 
in  the  Maricopa  Stake,  where  he  held 
the  offices  of  ward  president  of  M. 
I.  A.,  secretary  of  Sunday  School,  ward 
clerk  and  stake  clerk.  In  1911  he  re- 
moved to  San  Francisco  to  follow 
newspaper  work  as  an  artist  and  re- 
porter for  the  "Daily  News,"  and  la- 
ter, the  "Bulletin,"  and  "Call."  He 
was  also  associated  with  the  N.  E.  A., 
a  newspaper  syndicate,  for  several 
years.  From  1911  to  1915  he  was  ac- 
tive in  Church  work  in  the  San  Fran- 
cisco branch,  where  he  was  a  member 
of  the  Sunday  School  superintenden- 
cy,  and  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
In  1915  he  moved  to  Berkeley,  where 
he  became  active  in  the  auxiliary  or- 
ganizations of  the  Oakland  branch. 
In  1919  he  was  chosen  second  counse- 
lor to  Pres.  N.  B.  Phillips  of  that 
branch,  and  on  May  5,  1920,  was  set 
apart  by  Pres.  Jos.  W.  McMurrin  as 
president  of  said  branch,  then  belong- 
ing to  the  California  Mission.  Th ; 
branch  included  all  the  East  Bay  dis- 
trict from  Haywards  to  Vallejo.  Un- 
der his  dii'ection,  Sunday  schools,  and 
finally  branches,  were  organized  in 
Alameda,  Elmhurst,  Dimond,  Berke- 
ley, Richmond,  Martinez,  Haywards 
and  Vallejo.  On  Jan.  24,  1926,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Apostle 
John  A.  Witdsoe;  and  when  the  San 
Francisco    Stake   was   organized   July 


10,  1927,  he  was  set  apart  by  Apostles 
Rudger  Clawson  and  George  Albert 
Smith  to  preside  over  that  stake. 

On  June  2,  1909,  Pres.  Macdonald 
married  Nellie  Lesueur,  daughter  of 
Pres.  John  T.  Lesueur  of  the  Maricopa 
Stake  and  Geneva  Casto.  The  cere- 
mony was  performed  by  John  R.  Win- 
der in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  This 
union  has  been  blessed  with  two  sons, 
Clyde  Lesueur  (born  March  23,  1912) 
and  Keith  Lesueur  (born  March  14, 
1915),  both  in  San  Francisco,  Califor- 
nia. Pres.  Macdonald  is  a  man  of 
strong  and  pleasing  personality,  a  cap- 
able leader  and  a  devoted  Latter-day 
Saint. 

MATHESON,  John  B.,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake   of  Zion   since   1929,   was   born 


June  1,  1890,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Matheson  and  Catherine 
K.  Brown.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  3, 
1898,  ordained  to  the  offices  of  Deacon, 
Teacher,  Priest,  Elder  and  Seventy, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Rudger  Clawson.  He  has  held  various 
positions  in  the  Priesthood  quorums 
and  auxiliary  organizations  of  the 
Church,  including  secretary  and  later 
superintendent  of  Sunday  School  and 
president  of  M.  I.  A.  in  the  29th  Ward. 


164 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Salt  Lake  City.  He  was  deputy  com- 
missioner of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Dis- 
trict of  Boy  Scouts  of  America  and 
directed  scouting  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  for  thirteen  years.  He  served 
as  secretary  and  later  as  vice  presi- 
dent of  the  Third  Ward  Civic  Improve- 
ment Association  for  several  years  and 
was  elected  to  and  is  now  (1936)  serv- 
ing- on  the  Board  of  Education  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  Public  Schools.  He 
was  also  a  counselor  to  Bishop  Wil- 
ford  W.  Emery  of  the  29th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  president  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake.  Fi'om  the  latter  position  he 
was  honorably  released  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  President  Wilford 
A.  Beesley  in  the  Stake  presidency  on 
June  16,  1929.  On  June  1,  1911,  Elder 
Matheson  married  Edna  C.  Hazen  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple;  three  boys  and 
three  girls  have  been  born  of  this 
union. 

After  being  educated  in  the  elemen- 
tary schools,  Salt  Lake  High  School 
and  Business  College,  Brother  Mathe- 
son was  employed  by  Cutler  Bros. 
Company  of  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  for 
thirteen  years,  after  which  he  became 
a  member  of  A.  J,  Kirk  &  Company, 
wholesale  jobbers  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
of  which  firm  he  is  at  present  secre- 
tary and  one  of  the  directors. 

MABEY,  Chas.  R.,  Governor  of  Utah 
from  1921  to  1925,  and  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1925  to  1935,  was  born  Oct.  4, 
1877,  at  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Joseph  Thomas  Mabey  and  Sarah  L. 
Tolman.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  18, 
1885,  by  his  father,  functioned  in  offi- 
es  of  the  Aaronic  Priesthood  and 
later  was  ordained  an  Elder.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  July  20,  1900,  and 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Germany, 
from  which  he  returned  in  July,  1903. 
During  the  latter  part  of  this  mission 
he  presided  over  the  Berlin  Confer- 
ence. Bro.  Mabey  was  educated  in 
the  public  schools  of  Utah,  is  a  gradu- 


ate from  the  Normal  School  of  the 
University  of  Utah,  studied  at  the 
Chicago  University,  graduated  from 
the  School  of  Fire  at  Fort  Sill,  Okla- 
homa and  is  a  graduate  of  the  Ameri- 
can Institute  of  Banking.  He  served 
as  mayor  of  Bountiful  from  1911  to 
1913  and  was  a  member  of  the  State 
Legislature  from  1913  to  1915. 


Elder  Mabey  has  rendered  efficient 
service  to  his  country  as  a  soldier.  He 
was  captain  of  Company  "E"  of  the 
National  Guard  of  Utah  in  1897-1898; 
enlisted  as  a  volunteer  in  Battery  "A" 
Utah  Light  Artillery,  May  5,  1898,  and 
vvas  mustered  out  Aug.  16,  1899,  at 
San  Francisco,  Cal.  He  was  under 
fire  more  than  twenty  times  and  was 
cited  for  gallantry  in  action  on  river 
gunboat  "Covadonga"  on  Rio  Grande 
de  Pampanga  May  14,  1899.  He  vol- 
unteered as  a  private  in  the  World 
war  July  3,  1917,  served  with  the  145th 
Field  Artillery  as  captain  of  Battery 
"F"  and  as  instructor  at  the  School 
of  Fire,  Fort  Sill,  Oklahoma,  from 
April  to  December,  1918.  He  is  the 
author  of  a  book  entitled  "Utah  Bat- 
teries, a  History",  published  in  1900, 
served  as  a  member  of  the  American 
Legion  and  United  Spanish  War  Veter- 
ans and  as  commander  of  Salt  Lake 
Post  No.  2  American  Legion  in  1927- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


155 


1929.  While  serving  in  the  Utah  Leg- 
islature Elder  Mabey  was  author  of 
the  Anti-Race  Track  Gambling  Bill 
and  while  Governor  of  Utah  he  re- 
organized the  State's  administrative 
system,  inaugurated  fight  to  get  school 
lands  of  Utah  confirmed  to  the  state 
and  was  instrumental  in  securing  the 
Colorado  River  Pact  between  seven 
states,  whereby  rights  of  several  states 
were  established,  from  which  grew  the 
now  famous  Boulder  Dam. 

On  Dec.  20,  1905,  Elder  Mabey  mar- 
ried Afton  Rampton  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  This  marriage  has  been  bless- 
ed with  four  children,  namely,  Rendell 
N.,  Chas.  P.,  Robert  B.,  and  Edward  M. 

NIELSEN,  John  Strong,  Bishop  of 
the  Mona  Ward,  was  born  Aug.  28, 
1877,  at  Mona,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Christian  Emil  Nielsen  and  Chris- 
tine Knudsen.  He  was  reared  and 
schooled  in  Mona  and  later  became  a 
student  of  the  High  School  at  Payson, 
and  the  Juab  Stake  Academy  at  Nephi, 
and  of  the  Brigham  Young  Academy 
at  Provo.  He  was  baptized  by  his 
father,  ordained  to  offices  in  the 
Aaronic  Priesthood  and  ordained  an 
Elder  March  2,  1899,  by  his  father.  On 
Jan.  3,  1900,  Elder  Nielsen  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  George  Teasdale 
and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  during  which  he  la- 
bored principally  in  Virginia,  West 
Virginia,  New  Jersey  and  in  Brooklyn, 
N,  Y.  After  his  return  in  1902  he 
served  as  a  home  missionary.  On  June 
10, 1910,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  bishopric  of  the 
Mona  Ward  and  later  served  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Juab  Stake,  in  which  capacity  he  acted 
until  Oct.  6,  1929,  when  he  was  set 
apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Mona  Ward.. 

In  1914  (Aug.  19th)  he  married 
Hazel  Vest  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
This  union  has  been  blessed  with  ten 
children,  namely,  John  Merrill,  Helen 
Christine,  James  Wendell,  Mary,  Paul 
Wayne,    Calvin   Emil,   Elaine,   Joseph 


(deceased).  Grant  Elwood  and  Clark 
Reed. 

NIELSEN,  Soren  Michael,  third 
president  of  the  North  Sanpete  Stake 
of  Zion,  was  boi-n  June  4,  1886,  at  Vis- 
borg,  Aalborg  amt,  Denmai-k,  son  of 
Soren  Christian  Nielsen  Gade  and  Jo- 
hanne  Marie  Jensen  (Renborg).  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1895  with  his 
mother  and  family,  crossing  the  At- 
lantic in  the  steamship  "Ethiopia." 
The  family  located  in  Mount  Pleasant 
where  the  boy  attended  the  public 
schools  and  where  he  was  baptized 
when  11  years  old  by  Henry  Hasler 
and  later  ordained  a  Deacon.  Brother 
Nielsen  was  ordained  an  Elder  April 
13,  1913,  by  Christian  N.  Lund  and 
acted  as  a  counselor  in  the  1st  Quo- 
rum of  Elders  in  North  Sanpete  Stake 
from  1914  to  1917.  In  1914  he  was 
called  to  act  as  president  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  in  the  Mount  Pleasant  South 
Ward  which  position  he  held  for  two 
years  and  was  also  a  member  of  the 
ward  Sunday  School  superintendency. 
After  that  he  acted  as  Stake  superin- 
tendent of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy,  July  15,  1922,  and 
became  a  member  of  the  66th  Quorum 
of  Seventy.  On  April  1,  1923,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Rudger 
Clawson  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  North  Sanpete  Stake  of  Zion, 
which  position  he  still  held  in  1930. 

On  April  16,  1913,  Pres.  Nielsen 
married  Florence  Ericksen,  a  daughter 
of  Henry  Ericksen  and  Wilhelmina 
Monson.  This  union  has  been  blessed 
with  five  children,  namely,  Florence, 
Howard  Soren,  Don  Ericksen,  Grant 
Ericksen  and  Margerie. 

In  1919  Pres.  Nielsen  moved  into 
the  Mount  Pleasant  North  Ward, 
where  he  acted  as  an  officer  in  the 
ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as  ward  scout 
master.  In  scout  work  he  proved  him- 
self a  most  efficient  officer  and  in  1921 
led  a  successful  excursion  to  Bryce 
Canyon  with  nearly  200  people,  of 
whom  110  were  regular  scouts  from 
the   two   Mount  Pleasant  wards.    He 


156 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


also  served  as  deputy  scout  commis- 
sioner for  the  North  Sanpete  Stake, 
and  as  president  of  the  Bryce  Canyon 
Council  of  Boy  Scouts  of  America. 
Later  he  was  awarded  the  Silver  Beav- 
er award  for  distinguished  service  in 
scouting.  Fx'om  his  boyhood  days, 
Pres.  Nielsen  has  been  engaged  in  the 
sheep  business,  his  interests  extending 
into  various  parts  of  Utah  and  into 
Colorado,  Wyoming  and  Idaho.  In 
1908  he  became  associated  with  the 
Ericksen  Meat  and  Grocery  Company 
as  an  employee  and  stockholder.  At 
present  he  holds  a  conti'olling  interest 
in  the  firm,  is  manager  of  the  cor- 
poration and  has  charge  of  the  com- 
pany's store  on  Main  street,  Mount 
Pleasant.  He  is  still  interested  in  the 
sheep  industry  and  also  in  banking- 
enterprises.  Being  deeply  interested 
in  civic  affairs,  he  served  for  seven 
years  in  the  Utah  National  Guard  and 
in  1916-1917  did  actual  military  ser- 
vice on  the  Mexican  border  as  a  cap- 
tain of  cavalry.  He  served  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Utah  Water  Storage  Com- 
mission under  Governor  Dern  and  Gov- 
ernor Blood  successively,  was  presi- 
dent of  the  Snow  College  Board  until 
that  school  was  turned  over  to  the 
State  and  served  as  chairman  of  the 
Board  of  county  commissioners  of 
Sanpete  County  in  1933  and  1934. 
Summing  up  we  may  say  that  Pres. 
Nielsen  has  distinguished  himself  as 
a  successful  business  man,  a  good  citi- 
zen and  an  energetic  Church  worker. 

NOALL,  Irvin  Simon,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  of  Zion  since  1929,  was  born 
May  20,  1891,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Thomas  Noall  and 
Sarah  Elizabeth  Smith.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  June,  1899,  and  became  sec- 
retary and  later  president  of  a  Dea- 
cons' quorum.  Subsequently  he  was 
a  counselor  in  a  Teachers'  quorum; 
served  as  a  block  teacher  for  four 
years,  served  as  a  Sunday  School 
teacher    and     Stake     Sunday    School 


board  member.  He  was  a  president 
of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  28th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  later  served  as 
a  member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  M. 
I.  A.  Boai'd.  Brother  Noall  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  1911  in  prepara- 
tion for  a  mission  to  England  which 
extended  from  1911  to  1914.  His  la- 
boi's  were  chiefly  in  the  Leeds  Con- 
ference. He  became  a  member  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  High  Council  in  1924 
and  on  June  16,  1929,  he  was  set  apart 
as  a  counselor  to  Pres.  Wilford  A. 
Beesley  in  the  Stake  presidency. 


In  August,  1915,  Elder  Noall  mar- 
ried Sarah  E.  Walters.  Five  children 
have  blessed  this  union,  namely,  Mau- 
rine,  Phyllis,  Irvin  Walter,  Norma  La 
V^on  and  Kenneth  LeRoy. 

Elder  Noall  was  educated  in  the  ele- 
mentary and  secondary  schools  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  the  University  of  Utah 
(where  he  graduated  with  the  degree 
of  B.  A.  in  1918),  the  University  of 
California  (where  he  received  the  de- 
gree of  M.  A.  in  1927,  and  Ed.  D.  in 
May,  1935).  As  a  youth  he  learned 
the  carpenter  trade  under  his  father. 
In  1915  he  changed  his  occupation  to 
that  of  teaching,  which  he  pursued  as 
follows:  High  School  at  Milford  1915- 
1916;  Murdock  Academy  at  Beaver, 
1916-1918;     principal     at     Grantsville 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


157 


High  School,  1918-1919;  director  of 
part-time  and  evening  school  at  Og- 
den,  1919-1920;  state  supervisor  of 
Trade  and  Industrial  Education,  1920- 
1922,  and  1924-1934;  special  agent  for 
part-time  education  for  Federal  Board 
for  Vocational  Education,  1922-1924; 
state  director  of  Vocational  Education, 
1930-1936;  instructor  in  summer 
school  at  University  of  Califoi'nia, 
1924-1926,  and  1935;  at  Agricultural 
College  of  Utah,  1927,  and  University 
of  Utah,  1936;  supervisor  of  Vocation- 
al Teacher-Training  in  the  San  Fran- 
cisco Bay  Region  for  the  California 
State  Board  of  Education,  1934-1935. 

PALMER,  William  Rees,  eighth 
president  of  the  Parowan  Stake  of 
Zion,  was  born  at  Cedar  City,  Iron 
County,  Utah,  May  7,  1877,  the  son  of 
Richard  Palmer  and  Johanna  Rees. 
He  was  baptized  July  25,  1885,  by 
Charles  Heyborne,  ordained  a  Deacon 
by  Bishop  Wm.  H.  Corry  and  sub- 
sequently ordained  a  Teacher  and  a 
Priest.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 
his  father  in  1897  and  oi'dained  a 
Seventy  in  December,  1897,  by  Apostle 
George  Teasdale.  In  1897-1900  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southwestern  States, 
laboring  principally  in  what  was  then 
Indian  Territory  (now  Oklahoma)  and 
Kansas,  presiding  part  of  the  time 
over  the  Cherokee  Conference,  and 
serving  as  mission  secretary  during 
the  latter  part  of  his  mission.  From 
his  earliest  youth  he  was  active  in 
Church  affairs;  thus  he  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  1895- 
1897,  and  as  superintendent  of  the 
Ward  Sunday  School  for  twelve  years 
(1902-1914).  He  also  acted  as  a 
president  of  the  63rd  Quorum  of 
Seventy,  and  filled  the  position  of 
stake  clerk  from  1900  to  1909.  On 
Sept.  20,  1908,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Parowan  Stake  High  Council  from 
1909  to  1918.  On  June  22,  1918,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Richard  R.  Lyman  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over   the   Cedar   West  Ward. 


From  1909  to  1910  he  served  as 
county  assessor  for  Iron  County. 
Having  received  a  good  education  he 
engaged  in  the  banking  business  and 
for  a  number  of  years  sei'ved  as  cashier 
in  the  Iron  Commercial  and  Savings 
Bank,  and  later  as  a  director  in  the 
Bank  of  Southern  Utah.  He  also 
served  eight  years  as  book-keeper  and 
assistant  manager  of  the  Cedar  City 
Co-op  Store.  Later  he  acted  as  book- 
keeper, secretary  and  treasurer,  and 
still  later  as  manager  of  the  Cedar 
Mercantile  and  Livestock  Co.  and  as 
secretary-treasurer  of  the  Iron 
Springs  Sheep  Co.  In  1918  he  helped 
to  organize  the  Cedar  City  Home 
Building  Society  and  served  as  its 
president  until  1931.  Having  in  his 
youth  learned  the  trade  of  saddle  and 
harness  maker,  he  worked  with  his 
brothers  at  that  trade  for  several 
years,  prior  to  1900.  Having  served 
as  Bishop  of  the  Cedar  West  Ward 
for  three  years,  he  was  chosen  as 
second  counselor  to  Henry  W.  Lunt 
in  the  stake  presidency.  On  May  31, 
1925,  he  succeeded  President  Lunt 
as  president  of  the  Parowan  Stake  of 
Zion.  This  position  he  still  (1936) 
holds. 

President  Palmer  seems  to  be  a  nat- 
ural historian  and  has  spent  consider- 
able time  in  collecting  historical  data 
of  the  early  pioneer  days  of  Southern 
Utah  and  has  also  paid  considerable 
attention  in  that  line  to  the  Indian 
tribes  inhabiting  southern  Utah  and 
northern  Arizona.  In  recognition  of 
this  ability  he  was  appointed  by  Gov- 
ernor George  H.  Dern  to  serve  on  the 
Board  of  Control  of  the  Utah  State 
Historical  Society,  which  position  he 
still  holds.  He  has  published  much 
new  Indian  material  and  has  delivered 
many  lectures  on  Indian  and  pioneer 
subjects.  He  has  also  served  on  the 
historical  committee  of  the  Utah 
Trails  and  Landmarks  Society.  In 
October,  1935,  he  became  attached  to 
the  Church  Historians  Off"ice.  During 
the  World  war,  by  appointment  from 


158 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Bishop  Charles  W.  Nibley  he  organized 
the  first  Red  Cross  Chapter  for  Iron 
County  and  served  as  its  chairman 
until  after  the  close  of  the  war.  Dur- 
ing that  troublous  time  he  also  served 
either  as  chairman  or  as  secretary  in 
every  Liberty  Bond  sales  drive  in 
Cedar  City.  In  January,  1918,  he  viras 
appointed  by  General  Crowder  of  the 
U.  S.  Army,  a  member  of  the  soldiers 
legal  advisory  committee  and  in  that 
capacity  filled  out  most  of  the  draft 
questionnaires  for  the  Iron  County 
men.  When  in  1932  the  depression  was 
settling  heavily  on  the  people,  he  was 
again  elected  president  of  the  Red 
Cross  and  at  the  same  time  was  ap- 
pointed by  the  County  Commissioners 
as  Chairman  of  the  committee  to  han- 
dle the  newly  created  Federal  Relief. 
He  served  in  that  capacity  for  over 
two  years  and  in  that  time  oi'ganized 
one  hundred  work  projects  and  saw 
eighty  six  of  them  completed.  In 
June,  1924,  President  Palmer  took  an 
active  part  in  organizing  a  boy  scout 
council  for  southern  Utah,  and  became 
the  first  pi-esident  of  the  Zion  Park 
Scout  Council  of  the  Boy  Scouts  of 
America,  which  embraced  Millard, 
Beaver,  Iron,  Kane  and  Washington 
counties  in  Utah  and  Clark  and  Lin- 
coln counties  in  Nevada.  On  June 
9,  1933,  under  the  newly  passed  Debt- 
ors Relief  law  (Federal)  he  was  ap- 
pointed by  Judge  Tillman  D.  Johnson 
Conciliation  Commissioner  for  Iron 
County,  Utah.  One  year  later  his 
jurisdiction  was  extended  to  embrace 
Beaver,  Iron  and  Washington  counties. 
When  the  Church  set  up  its  Social 
Security  Plan  in  1936,  and  stakes 
were  grouped  into  Regional  units, 
President  Palmer  was  selected  as  the 
first  regional  executive  chairman  for 
the  St.  George  Region,  embracing  the 
Kanab,  Zion  Park,  St.  George,  Moapa 
and  Parowan  Stakes.  He  is  now 
(1936)  active  in  this  work.  On  May 
7,  1901,  he  married  Kate  Vilate  Isom, 
(daughter  of  George  Isom  and  Alice 
Parker),  who  was   born  January  23, 


1878,  at  Virgin,  Washington  Co., 
Utah.  This  union  has  been  blessed 
with  eight  children,  namely,  Alice, 
George,  William  I.,  Vilate,  Elizabeth, 
Eugene,  Richard  I.,  and  Rodney. 

PETERSON,  Elwood  Lynn,  fourth 
Bishop  of  Lakeside  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  was  born  Nov.  2,  1908,  at  Lake- 
side, Navajo  Co.,  Arizona,  a  son  of 
Joseph  Peterson  and  Amanda  Melvina 
Andelin.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  3, 
1916,  by  Don  C.  Smith  and  ordained 


an  Elder  Nov.  11,  I'J^S,  by  his  father. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Aug.  23, 
1930,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop,  May  9,  1931, 
by  Apostle  George  F.  Richards,  on 
which  occasion  he  was  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Lakeside  Ward.  Bro. 
Peterson  had  previously  served  as 
counselor  in  a  Deacons  Quorum,  super- 
intendent of  Sunday  School,  scout 
master  and  ward  teacher.  He  grad- 
uated from  the  grammar  school  at 
Lakeside  and  from  the  Union  High 
School  at  Snowflake,  Arizona,  and 
while  in  the  latter  school  acted  as 
president  of  the  student  class  in  his 
sophomore  year,  as  standard  bearer 
in  his  junior  year  and  as  the  class 
president  again  in  his  senior  year. 
He  also  was  graduated  from  the 
L.    D.    S.    Seminary   in   Snowflake   in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


159 


1927.  He  attended  the  Utah  State 
Agricultural  College  for  a  year,  but 
due  to  ill  health  could  not  continue. 
On  Oct.  21,  1930,  he  married  Lucilia 
Smith  in  the  Arizona  Temple.  Three 
children  have  been  born  of  this  union, 
namely  Elwood  Russell,  Dwain  Smith 
and  Marguerite. 

PETERSON,  Hugo  Daniel  Edward, 

missionary,  editor  and  ti-anslator,  was 
born  Aug.  14,  18G0,  in  the  city  of 
Visby,   Isle    of    Gotland,   Sweden,    the 


son  of  Isak  Peterson  and  Anna  Sophia 
Gardstedt.  Being  born  of  goodly  par- 
ents, he  was  baptized  May  11,  1873, 
ordained  a  Priest  April  27,  1880,  an 
Elder  Aug.  31,  1881,  by  Niels  Wil- 
helmsen,  a  Seventy  Feb.  23,  1885,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  and  a  High  Priest 
by  John  H.  Anderson,  Nov.  23,  1928. 
In  the  summer  of  1879  he  was  called 
by  Pres.  Niels  Wilhelmsen  to  Copen- 
hagen, Denmai-k,  the  headquarters  of 
the  Scandinavian  Mission,  to  become 
translator    and    associate    editor    of 


"Nordstjarnan."  He  held  that  posi- 
tion from  February,  1881,  to  June, 
1883,  when  he,  with  his  brother  Anton 
P.  Peterson,  emigrated  to  Utah  and 
entered  the  parental  home,  in  Scipio, 
Utah,  where  the  parents  had  settled 
the  previous  year.  After  spending  his 
fii'st  years  in  Utah  laboring  with  his 
father  and  brother  in  the  building 
trade,  in  farm  work,  and  as  clerk  to 
Bishop  Thomas  Yates  in  the  Scipio 
Co-op  store.  Brother  Peterson  went  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  engaged  in 
his  trade  as  a  printer.  After  working 
for  some  time  on  "Svenska  Harolden," 
and  the  "Salt  Lake  Herald,"  he  be- 
came a  compositor  and  later  a  lino- 
type operator  on  the  "Deseret  News," 
until  he  in  June,  1914,  was  appointed 
to  publish  "Utah-Posten,"  a  Swedish 
weekly  newspaper,  one  of  four  Church- 
owned  foreign  language  publications 
issued  in  Salt  Lake  City,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  till  May,  1923,  when  he 
was  called  to  preside  over  the  Swedish 
Mission,  and  while  there,  in  addition 
to  his  other  duties,  he  again  trans- 
lated, and  edited  the  mission  period- 
ical, "Nordstjarnan."  After  returning 
home  from  this  mission,  he  held  a  po- 
sition in  the  Church  Historian's  Of- 
fice, until  he,  in  May,  1934,  again  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  Swedish  Mis- 
sion, and  while  occupying  this  position 
supervised  the  printing  of  a  third  edi- 
tion of  the  Book  of  Mormon  in  the 
Swedish  language,  a  new  translation 
of  which  was  made  a  few  years  previ- 
ously by  Bro.  Janne  M.  Sjodahl,  and  in 
which  labor  Elder  Peterson  had  as- 
sisted. He  also  revised  and  prepared 
a  number  of  booklets,  pamphlets  and 
tracts  for  the  printers,  and  contracted 
for  and  watched  some  large  improve- 
ments and  repairs  of  the  mission  house 
in  Stockholm.  On  May  23,  1884,  he 
mai-ried  Miss  Axeline  Manuella  Niel- 
sen, born  in  Copenhagen,  Dec.  10, 
1865,  the  wedding  ceremony  taking 
place  in  the  Endowment  House  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  This  union  has  been 
blessed    with    nine    children,    namely, 


160 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Hugo  C.  A.,  Mrs.  Alma  P.  Zobell  (de- 
ceased), Walter  A.,  Francis  (Frank) 
E.,  Mrs.  Norma  P.  Anderson,  Mrs. 
Viola  P.  Kasteler,  Mrs.  Ella  P.  Clift, 
Earl  L.,  and  Mrs.  Mildred  P.  Kinners- 
ley.  Sister  Peterson  and  daughter 
Mildred  accompanied  Elder  Peterson 
on  his  mission  to  Sweden  in  1923-1925, 
when  they  labored  in  the  several  auxil- 
iary organizations,  Sister  Peterson, 
besides,  presiding  over  the  Relief  So- 
ciety organizations  in  the  mission,  and 
in  the  Stockholm  Branch,  while  Mil- 
dred functioned  as  the  branch  organ- 
ist. Sister  Peterson  again  accompa- 
nied her  husband  on  his  mission  in 
1934-1936,  and  took  an  active  part  in 
missionary  work.  Elder  Peterson  has 
from  his  youth  been  a  faithful  worker 
in  the  Church.  He  was  for  many 
years  a  president  of  the  4th  Quorum 
of  Seventy;  choir  leader  for  about 
twenty-five  years  in  the  early  Scan- 
dinavian meetings,  from  the  time  they 
were  held  in  the  old  Social  Hall;  pre- 
sided over  the  Swedish  organization 
in  the  Ensign  Stake  from  1906  to  1916, 
and  has  also  presided  over  the  Swed- 
ish Missionary  Society.  By  appoint- 
ment of  the  First  Presidency  in  1909 
he  compiled  and  published  Zion's 
Sanger,  in  the  Swedish  language,  and 
Zion's  Sange,  in  the  Danish-Norweg- 
ian language,  both  words  and  music. 
For  some  years  he  was  a  member  of 
the  force  of  Elders  in  Ensign  Stake 
set  apart  to  administer  to  the  sick  in 
the  hospitals.  He  also  labored  as  a 
missionary  in  the  Ensign  Stake  among 
the  non-"Mormon"  population,  and 
from  his  early  youth  served  as  a  block 
teacher.  Since  returning  from  his  last 
mission.  Brother  Peterson  has  again 
been  employed  in  the  Church  Histori- 
an's Office. 

Brother  Peterson  has  always  been 
an  observer  of  the  Word  of  Wisdom, 
and  says  that  through  thus  living  an 
exemplary  life,  he  is  enjoying  such 
health  and  vigor  as  usually  are  en- 
joyed only  by  younger  people. 


PETERSON,  Joseph,  first  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  was  born  April  10, 
1874,  at  Lehi,  Utah,  a  son  of  Andrew 
A.  Peterson  and  Anna  Maria  Earland 


(Mary  Ann  Erlandson),  who  had  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1862  and  settled  at 
Lehi.  There  Joseph  was  baptized  and 
ordained  successively  to  the  offices  of 
Deacon,  Priest  and  Elder.  As  a  boy 
he  herded  stock  on  the  range  in  the 
summer  and  studied  in  the  winter.  He 
is  an  ardent  lover  of  nature  and  also 
of  books,  and  it  was  hard  for  him  to 
choose  his  vocation  in  life.  But  by  the 
advice  of  his  parents  he  entered  the 
Brigham  Young  University  in  Provo, 
in  1891,  graduating  from  that  institu- 
tion in  1897  with  the  degree  of  Bache- 
lor of  Pedagogy.  In  1898  he  was  called 
to  go  to  Arizona,  as  principal  of  the 
Snowflake  Academy,  and  has  resided 
in  Navajo  County,  Arizona,  ever  since. 
On  Dec.  10,  1900,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Pres.  Jesse  N.  Smith 
and  set  apart  as  a  member  of  the  Stake 
High  Council,  and  on  Oct.  19,  1924,  was 
set  apart  by  Pres.  Rudger  Clawson  as 
first  counselor  to  Pres.  Samuel  F. 
Smith  of  the  Snowflake  Stake,  a  posi- 
tion which  he  still  holds   (1936). 

Elder  Peterson  was  one  of  the  found- 
ers of  Lakeside,  Arizona,  by  assisting 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


161 


to  purchase  a  sheep  ranch  and  laboring 
to  convert  it  into  a  beautiful  mountain 
settlement.  He  has  held  a  number  of 
important  political  positions  including 
that  of  county  superintendent  of 
schools  for  three  terms,  representa- 
tive of  Navajo  County  in  the  territor- 
ial legislature  and  member  of  the 
county  board  of  supervisors.  During 
the  World  w^ar  he  acted  as  secretary 
of  the  Navajo  County  Council  of  De- 
fense, was  one  of  the  "Four  Minute 
Speakers"  and  chairman  of  the  county 
committee  in  the  drive  for  funds  car- 
ried on  by  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  and  allied 
organizations.  On  Dec.  24,  1897,  he 
married  Amanda  M.  Andelin  of  Rich- 
field in  the  Manti  Temple;  four  sons 
and  two  daughters  were  born  of  this 
union  before  the  mother  passed  into 
the  Great  Beyond,  Aug.  16,  1919.  On 
Aug.  21,  1924,  he  married  Lydia  Sav- 
age Smith,  a  young  widow  with  two 
daughters.  Sister  Lydia  has  become 
the  mother  of  five  sons  (one  de- 
ceased). 

PERSCHON,  William  Franz  Albert, 

Sixth  Bishop  of  the  Fourth  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  was  born  Oct. 


20,  1883,  at  Konigsberg,  East  Prussia, 
Germany,  the  son  of  Karl  Albert  Per- 
schon  and  Wilhelmine  Mahnke.  His 
parents  were  not  members  of  the 
Church,  but  young  Perschon,  who  be- 


came a  convert  to  "Mormonism,"  was 
baptized  Oct.  10,  1903,  by  Gottlieb 
Blatter  at  Konigsberg.  The  father 
died  when  Brother  Perschon  was  17 
years  old,  and  leaving  his  family  in 
East  Prussia  he  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1905,  and  located  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
After  residing  in  the  20th  Ward  about 
two  years,  he  became  a  permanent 
resident  of  the  4th  Ward.  Having 
been  ordained  first  a  Deacon,  and  later 
a  Teacher  before  leaving  Germany, 
he  was  ordained  an  Elder  by  C.  Clar- 
ence Neslen  and  later  presided  over 
the  first  quorum  of  Elders  in  the  Pio- 
neer Stake.  He  also  acted  as  super- 
intendent of  the  4th  Ward  Sunday 
School.  On  Dec.  21st,  1919,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Chas.  H. 
Hyde  and  set  apart  as  second  counse- 
lor to  Bishop  Charles  H.  Worthen  of 
the  4th  Wai'd,  which  position  he  held 
until  Aug.  26,  1923,  when  he  was  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  of  the  4th  Ward.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun.,  Sept.  7,  1923.  In  1906 
(Oct.  10)  he  married  Johanna  E. 
Bucholz,  which  marriage  has  been 
blessed  with  nine  childi'en,  namely; 
Ruth  E.,  Margaret  M.,  William  V., 
Grace  L.,  Madeline  J.,  Charles  A., 
Johanna  E.,  Joseph  A.,  and  Edith  E. 
Bishop  Perschon  is  a  painter  and  dec- 
orator by  vocation,  having  learned  his 
trade  in  Germany.  At  present  he  is 
the  head  of  the  Perschon  Paint  &  Wall- 
paper Company,  with  store  and  ware- 
house on  State  Street,  Salt  Lake  City. 

PORTER,  Roy  Stillman,  stockraiser 
and  farmer,  was  born  in  Granger,  Salt 
Lake  County,  Utah,  Feb.  20,  1880. 
Roy  spent  his  early  life  on  the  farm 
of  his  maternal  Aunt  and  Uncle,  Mary 
Stillman  Porter  and  Moses  Ross  Por- 
ter in  Granger.  These  were  his  kind 
foster-parents  and  the  latter  subse- 
quently became  senior  partner  in  the 
ranching  business  with  him.  After 
graduating  from  the  public  school  at 
Granger,  Roy  took  the  missionary 
course  at  the  Latter-day  Saint's  Uni- 
versity   in    Salt  Lake   City.      In    1904 


Vol.  IV.  No.   11 


March   14,   193G 


162 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


he  graduated  fi'om  the  Normal  course 
in  that  institution.  The  following 
year  he  taught  school  near  his  home. 
In  the  summer  of  1905  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States. 
Here,  fi'om  the  mission  headquarters 
at  Chattanooga,  Tenn.,  he  labored  for 
27  months.  Most  of  his  work  was 
done  in  the  state  of  Alabama,  where, 
through  his  mildness  and  faithfulness, 
he  won  converts  to  the  Church  and 
friends  to  himself.  On  his  return  to 
Utah  he  entered  into  partnership  with 
his  Uncle,  Ross  Porter,  a  native  of 
Kentucky,  hay  and  grain  merchant  and 
fruit  grower  in  Taylorsville,  West 
Jordan,  Granger,  and  Brighton,  west 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  At  his  home  ranch, 
"The  Oasis,"  located  midway  between 
Salt  Lake  City  and  Magna,  he  con- 
ducted a  successful  cattle  business  and 
did  valuable  experimental  work  in  the 
cultivation  of  alkali  ground.  He  serv- 
ed on  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  board  of 
Granite  Stake,  also  as  a  home  mis- 
sionary, was  a  member  of  the  High 
Priest's  quorum,  and  president  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  Brighton  ward  for 
many  years,  as  well  as  head  of  the  boy 
scouts  of  this  locality.  While  road 
supervisor  of  Brighton  and  North 
Point,  the  largest  district  in  area  in 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  he  obtained  the  old  rail- 
road grade  for  gravel  to  surface  the 
roads  west  of  the  city  and  also  built  a 
number  of  substantial  bridges  over  the 
canals  that  intersect  this  country.  He 
had  charge  of  some  of  the  drainage 
woi'k  of  this  section,  acted  as  Demo- 
cratic district  chairman  and  was  vice- 
president  of  the  North  Jordan  Irri- 
gation company  as  well  as  a  stock- 
holder in  the  Utah  and  Salt  Lake 
Canal   Co. 

On  July  17,  1912,  he  married  Miss 
Elizabeth  Rachel  Cannon  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  Prest.  Anthon  H.  Lund 
officiating.  She  is  the  daughter  of  the 
late  Angus  M.  Cannon,  President  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  and  Dr. 
Martha  Hughes  Cannon,  Utah  pioneer 
physician.  The  issues  of  this  marriage 


were  three  children,  namely,  Roy,  jun., 
who  died  in  infancy;  Martha  Hughes 
Porter  (Mrs.  Bruce  K.  Arnold)  and 
Mary  Idelia  Porter. 

Elder  Porter  died  at  Buena  Vista, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  Aug.  8,  1919, 
aged  39  years. 

PYE,  Mary  Francis  (Kelly),  a  for- 
mer member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.  Board,  was  born  Sept. 
11,  1867,  at  Allahabad,  India,  a  daugh- 


ter of  Robert  Dolbey  Francis  and  Ma- 
ria Banks.  Dr.  Francis  (a  practicing 
physician  and  pharmaceutical  chem- 
ist) died  of  sunstroke  in  1869  and  Mrs. 
Francis  brought  her  two  little  daugh- 
ters (Mary,  two  years  old,  and  Alice, 
three  months)  to  England.  Here  they 
were  left  with  their  grandparents 
(William  and  Maria  Lamprell  Banks) 
while  Mrs.  Francis  returned  to  India 
later  in  1869  to  settle  up  her  affairs. 
Under  the  care  of  their  grandparents 
the  little  girls  received  instruction  un- 
der private  teachers  until  the  return 
of  their  mother  to  England  in  1875, 
when  they  were  put  into  the  public 
schools.  Later,  Mary  and  her  sister 
attended  the  Gordon  Academy  for  girls 
in  Clapham,  London,  and  then  went 
to  a  convent  school  in  France  to  take 
a  "finishing  course"  abroad,  a  custom 
in  England.  This,  however,  led  to  Alice 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


163 


becoming-  a  Catholic  and  later  a  nun. 
In  1892  the  family  met  some  of  the 
L.  D.  S.  missionaries  and  becoming 
converts,  Mary  and  her  mother  were 
baptized  in  London  and  came  to  Utah 
in  the  fall  of  1894,  where  on  Nov.  28, 
1894,  Mary  was  married  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple  to  Willai-d  John  Kelly, 
an  Elder  whose  acquaintance  she  had 
made  in  London.  But  the  young  couple 
were  not  long  permitted  to  enjoy  their 
happiness  for  Brother  Kelly  died  sud- 
denly Feb.  28,  1895,  just  three  months 
to  the  day,  after  their  marriage.  Sis- 
ter Kelly  and  her  mother  then  engaged 
in  the  dressmaking  business  in  Salt 
Lake  City  and  finally  had  charge  of 
the  Woman's  Co-op  Store,  belonging 
to  the  Relief  Society.  In  1903  Sister 
Francis  retired  from  business  and  Sis- 
ter Kelly  became  an  instructor  at  the 
L.  D.  S.  U.,  teaching  French  and  sew- 
ing. She  was  the  first  instructor  in 
the  Domestic  Arts  department  of  the 
institution  and,  upon  leaving  four 
years  later,  had  two  assistant  teach- 
ers, so  popular  was  the  course  offered. 
In  1907  she  was  married  to  Caleb 
Enoch  Pye,  a  widower,  and  endeavored 
to  do  her  duty  as  a  mother  to  his  fam- 
ily and  also  became  the  mother  of  one 
son  (John  Kelly  Pye).  Brother  Caleb 
E.  Pye  died  of  cancer,  May  15,  1915, 
after  which  Sister  Pye  was  engaged 
to  work  in  the  Historian's  Office  as 
a  clerk,  and  later  as  secretary  to  An- 
drew Jenson,  which  position  she  still 
(1936)  holds. 

Sister  Pye  has  occupied  many  posi- 
tions of  trust  in  the  Church,  having 
been  a  counselor  in  the  20th  Ward  Y. 
W.  M.  I.  A.,  a  member  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  and  Ensign  Stake  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.  boards,  chorister  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  Relief  Society,  superin- 
tendent of  Religion  Class,  Sunday 
School  teacher  and  class  leader  in  the 
14th  Ward  Genealogical  Society,  etc. 
She  is  the  author  of  a  number  of  short 
stories,  poems  and  articles  published 
in   local  journals    and   twice   was  the 


winner  of  the  Deseret  News  Christmas 
Story  contest. 

RICH,  Alice  MacLachlan,  widow  of 
Ben  E.  Rich,  was  born  Feb.  21,  1869,  at 
Salt  Lake  City,  the  daughter  of  Wil- 
liam McLachlan  and  Caroline  Filer, 
being  the  fifth  child  in  a  family  of  ten 
children.  After  having  received  the 
usual  grade  schooling,  she  attended 
the  Deseret  University.  At  the  age  of 
seventeen  she  applied  for  the  position 
of  teacher  in  the  Primary  grade  of 
the  West  Jordan  school,  and  was  given 
charge  of  the  entire  school  of  three 
grades.  Preferring  another  vocation, 
however,  she  later  found  employment 
in  the  R.  K.  Thomas  store  in  the  old 
Eagle  Emporium  building,  on  1st 
South  and  Main  streets,  remaining 
with  that  establishment  for  fifteen 
years. 

Beginning  in  the  year  1906,  Sister 
Rich  served  three  and  a  half  years  as 
clerk  in  the  State  Treasurer's  office,  in 
1914  for  seven  months  as  deputy 
county  clerk  for  Davis  County,  and 
then  for  the  following  four  years  in 
the  employ  of  the  State  Insurance  De- 
partment. In  December,  1917,  she  was 
called  to  take  a  position  in  the  Pre- 
siding Patriarch's  office,  where  she 
remained  for  ten  years.  In  1927  she 
became  a  member  of  the  Historian's 
Office  staff,  which  position  she  still 
(1936)  retains. 

During  the  year  1900,  Sister  Rich 
filled  a  mission  for  the  Church  in  the 
Northern  States.  At  home  also  she 
has  been  an  active  Church  member, 
having  served  as  the  first  secretary  of 
the  Primary  Association,  organized  in 
1882  in  the  7th  Ward  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  with  Sister  Permeiia  James  as 
president.  In  the  M.  I.  A.  of  the  same 
ward  Sister  Rich  later  held  the  posi- 
tions of  secretary,  second  counselor, 
and  first  counselor.  From  the  latter 
position  she  resigned  when  called  on 
her  mission.  Having  moved  to  Center- 
ville  in  1909,  she  served  as  a  member 
of  the  Centerville  Genealogical  Com- 


164 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


mittee  until  her  appointment  on  the 
South  Davis  Stake  Genealogical  Board. 
As  a  member  of  the  famous  Taber- 
nacle Choir,  Sister  Rich  visited  the 
World's  Fair  with  that  organization 
in  1893,  and  later  accompanied  that 
body  of  singers  on  its  trip  to  Califor- 
nia and  Colorado.  She  also  recalls 
with  great  pleasure  the  visits  she  has 
made  to  the  several  temples  built  by 
the  Church,  including  those  of  Kirt- 
land,  Logan,  Manti,  St.  George,  Ari- 
zona and  Salt  Lake  City. 

RICHINS,  Jessie  Willmott,  presi- 
dent of  the  Twin  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  16,  1879,  at 
Henefer,  Utah,  a  son  of  Chai-les  Rich- 


■'.^j^m 


ins  and  Agnes  Mary  Willmott.  He  was 
baptized  in  June  1887,  by  Albert 
Harris  and  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Colonia  Diaz,  Old  Mexico,  when  nine 
years  old.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  July  19,  1898,  by 
George  Reynolds.  On  his  return  to 
Mexico  from  this  mission  he  married 
Alice  Jackson,  daughter  of  Joseph  B. 
Jackson  and  Mary  E.  Beckstead,  the 
ceremony  being  performed  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  Oct.  25,  1900.  Four 
sons  and  eight  daughters  were  born 
of  this  union,  namely,  Osborn,  Ezral, 


Jesse  Willmott,  jun.,  Joseph,  Alice  La- 
Preal,  Vera  May,  Leola,  Agnes,  Zelpha, 
Mary,  Nedra  and  Beverly.  The  Rich- 
ins  family  was  driven  out  of  Mexico  in 
1912  and  located  in  Idaho,  where 
Brother  Richins  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop,  April  30,  1916,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Hazel 
Ward,  Cassia  Stake,  Idaho,  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  jun..  On  June  1,  1924,  he 
was  set  apart  by  Apostle  Richard  R. 
Lyman  as  second  counselor  to  Presi- 
dent Lawrence  G.  Kirkman  of  the  Twin 
Falls  Stake,  and  on  Oct.  26,  1930,  he 
was  set  apart  as  president  of  the  Twin 
Falls  Stake  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  suc- 
ceeding Lawrence  G.  Kirkman. 

Pres.  Richins  has  been  engaged  in 
farming  and  stock  raising  and  for  five 
years  acted  as  labor  agent  and  Spanish 
interpreter  for  the  Amalgamated 
Sugar  Co.,  and  since  1925  has  been  as- 
.sociated  with  the  Beneficial  Life  Insur- 
ance Co.,  his  field  of  activity  compris- 
ing the  Western  states  and  parts  of 
Canada  and  Mexico.  For  two  years  he 
was  president  of  the  Twin  Falls  dis- 
trict of  the  Boy  Scouts  of  America. 

SCHREINER,  Alexander,  organist  of 
the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 


was  born  July  31,  1901,  in  Nuremberg, 
Germany,  the  son  of  Johann  Christian 
and  Margarethe  Schwemmer  Schrein- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


165 


er.  His  parents  joined  the  Church  in 
1903  and  soon  thereafter  offered  their 
home  to  the  branch  for  regular  sacra- 
ment services,  Sunday  school  and  choir 
rehearsals.  This  afforded  their  son 
opportunity  to  hear  much  chui'ch  music 
at  an  early  age.  When  only  five  years 
old,  at  a  Christmas  program,  he  played 
in  public  for  the  first  time.  He  was 
baptized  at  the  age  of  eight,  at  which 
time  he  was  also  appointed  organist 
for  the  Nuremberg  branch  of  the 
Church.  His  regular  duties  consisted 
of  playing  for  Sunday  school,  Sacra- 
mental meeting,  choir  rehearsal  and 
the  mid-week  Bible  hour.  At  this  time 
he  was  studying  piano  with  Herr 
Karl  Anders  and  violin  with  Herr 
Stengl. 

In  1912  he  left  Germany  with  his 
parents  and  settled  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  was  immediately  appointed  organ- 
ist for  the  German  meetings,  and,  soon 
thereafter,  organist  in  the  Cannon 
Ward.  His  musical  studies  in  piano, 
harmony  and  organ  were  continued 
under  the  tutelage  of  John  J.  McClel- 
lan,  who  recognized  the  talent  of  this 
eleven-year-old  boy  and  who  at  thac 
early  date  predicted  a  brilliant  future 
for  him. 

At  the  age  of  sixteen,  Alexander 
Schreiner  was  engaged  to  play  the 
large  organ  at  the  American  Theater, 
then  the  most  important  play-house  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  By  the  time  he  finish- 
ed high  school  he  was  offered  a  similar 
position  in  Butte,  Montana,  and,  fol- 
lowing this,  he  did  theater  work  in 
Portland,  Oregon,  and  in  Los  Angeles, 
California.  At  the  age  of  twenty  he 
played  his  first  recitals  on  the  Taber- 
nacle organ  at  the  invitation  of  the 
regular  organists. 

In  1921  he  left  for  a  mission  in 
California.  His  fame  was  then  already 
established,  for  during  his  first  year 
of  missionary  work  eight  different 
organist's  positions  were  offered  him, 
greatly  to  the  pride  and  astonishment 
of  his  missionary  companions.  Of 
course  none  of  these  positions  could  be 


accepted  at  that  time.  However,  he 
played  a  number  of  concert  engage- 
ments, dedicating  new  church  organs, 
one  of  which  was  the  large  organ  in 
Angeles  Temple,  Los  Angeles.  During 
the  last  part  of  his  mission  he  pre- 
sided over  the  Los  Angeles  Conference, 
in  which  thirty-five  missionaries  were 
laboring.  He  was  released  in  March, 
1924. 

Upon  his  return  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
he  was  immediately  appointed  one  of 
the  organists  at  the  Tabernacle.  In 
September,  1924,  he  left  for  Europe, 
and  for  two  years  in  Paris  he  studied 
harmony  and  counterpoint  with  Henri 
Libert,  and  organ  with  Charles  Marie 
Widor  and  Louis  Vierne,  the  latter 
organist  at  Notre  Dame  Cathedral.  He 
was  invited  frequently  to  play  various 
important  organs,  and  thus  had  good 
opportunity  to  study  their  design  and 
construction. 

In  1927  he  mai'ried  Margaret 
Lyman,  daughter  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Rich- 
ard R.  Lyman,  who  was  born  Sept. 
15,  1903.  Two  children  have  been 
born  to  this  union,  namely,  Richard 
Lyman  Schreiner  in  1931  and  John 
Christian  Schreiner  in  1933. 

In  1930,  when  the  University  of 
California  at  Los  Angeles  was  pre- 
sented with  the  beautiful  Mudd 
Memorial  organ,  Mr.  Schreiner  was 
invited  to  play  the  fii'st  25  recitals. 
This  was  to  be  followed  by  other 
series  of  recitals  by  other  organists, 
in  order  that  the  University  authori- 
ties might  have  some  basis  of  judg- 
ment on  which  to  make  a  final  selec- 
tion for  the  permanent  position.  After 
Mr.  Schi-einer  had  played  his  first  six 
recitals,  his  success  was  so  outstanding 
that  the  contracts  with  the  other  or- 
ganists (who  were  to  try  out)  were 
all  cancelled  and  he  was  appointed 
University  organist  with  the  consent 
of  the  Fii'st  Presidency  of  the  Church, 
who  gave  him  a  yearly  leave  of  ab- 
cense  for  nine  months.  He  continues 
to  spend  his  summers  at  the  Taber- 
nacle, where  he  plays  national  radio 


166 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


broadcasts  and  noon  recitals.  At  the 
University  of  California  at  Los  An- 
geles, in  addition  to  his  duties  as 
organist,  he  is  a  member  of  the  faculty 
as   lecturer  in   music. 

For  five  years  he  was  organist  at 
the  First  Methodist  Church  of  Los 
Angeles,  the  largest  Methodist  Church 
in  the  world.  He  assisted  John 
McCormack  in  the  making  of  one  of 
his  motion  pictures  at  the  Fox  Studio. 
He  has  played  dedicatory  i-ecitals  at 
Barker  Brothers  in  Los  Angeles,  and 
in  Riverside,  San  Bex-nardino,  Fuller- 
ton,   Phoenix  and  other  cities. 

During  the  summer  of  1936  the 
"Deseret  News"  presented  him  in  a 
series  of  special  Bach,  Franck  and 
Wagner  programs  at  five  p.  m.  in  the 
Tabernacle.  These  recitals  were  en- 
thusiastically received  by  large  audi- 
ences. 

Mr.  Schreiner  is  intensely  interested 
in  devising  plans  for  the  improvement 
of  musical  equipment  in  the  chapels 
of  the  Church.  He  feels  that  a  pipe- 
organ  is  a  most  desirable  adjunct  to 
a  church  edifice,  and  that  nothing  of 
equal  cost  can  inspire  and  lead  to  lofty 
thoughts  as  does  the  music  from  a 
church  organ.  In  1936  he  wrote  for 
wai'd  and  Sunday  school  organists  a 
book  of  devotional  music  entitled 
"Schreiner's  Organ  Voluntaries." 

SEEGMILLER,  Daniel,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Kanab 
Stake  from  1887  to  1899,  was  born 
Dec.  6,  1836,  in  Preston,  Canada,  the 
son  of  Adam  Seegmiller  and  Anna 
Eve  Knechtel.  As  a  youth  he  located 
in  New  York  City,  where  he  became 
a  convert  to  the  Church  and  was 
baptized  thore  Sept.  3,  1853.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1861  and  the  follow- 
ing year  returned  as  far  as  the  Mis- 
souri River  with  Church  teams  to  as- 
sist in  bringing  L.  D.  S.  emigrants  to 
Utah.  Altogether  he  crossed  the 
plains  six  times  in  that  capacity.  He 
served  on  the  police  force  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  at  times  acted  as  body  guard 
for    President    Brigham    Young.      He 


filled  a  mission  to  Germany  and  Swit- 
zerland from  1877  to  1879,  during 
which  he  presided  over  the  East  Swiss, 
Zurich  and  Frankfurt  on  the  Main 
conferences  successively.  Previous  to 
going  on  this  mission  he  located  in  St. 
George,  Utah,  where  he  acted  as  Chief 
of  Police  and  later  as  Sheriff  of  Wash- 
ington County.  Later  he  moved  to 
Kanab,  Kane  County,  where  he  oper- 
ated a  farm  and  raised  choice  stock. 
On  May  24,  1887,  he  was  set  apart  by 
Apostle  Francis  M.  Lyman  as  second 
counselor  to  Edwin  D.  Woolley,  presi- 
dent of  the  Kanab  Stake,  which  posi- 
tion he  occupied  until  his  untimely 
death.  For  some  time  previous  to  this 
tragedy,  a  misunderstanding  had  ex- 
isted between  himself  and  a  neighbor, 
Wm.  Roundy,  over  land  and  water 
matters,  their  land  being  contiguous 
and  their  water  interests  vested  in  the 
same  system.  On  July  23,  1899,  Wm. 
Roundy,  finding  no  water  in  the  ditch, 
became  enraged  and  going  to  the  home 
of  Bro.  Seegmiller,  he  called  him  out- 
side and  a  few  minutes  later  shot  him 
through  the  heart.  The  murderer  then 
returned  to  his  home  and  after  bid- 
ding farewell  to  his  family,  shot  him- 
self with  fatal  result. 

Bro.  Seegmiller  had  three  wives,  1st, 
Ellen  Smith  (daughter  of  Joseph 
Smith  and  Sarah  Sailor),  who  bore 
him  three  sons  and  five  daughters;  2nd, 
Artimesia  Snow  Woolley  (daughter  of 
Ei'astus  and  Artemesia  Snow,  and  the 
widow  of  Franklin  B.  Woolley,  who 
was  killed  by  Indians  in  1862),  3rd, 
Emma  Isabella  Cai-roll  (daughter  of 
Charles  Negus  Carroll)  who  bore  him 
four  sons  and  one  daughter.  Bro 
Seegmiller  was  a  frontiersman  with  a 
commanding  appearance  and  knowing 
no  fear.  But  to  his  family  he  was  a 
kind  and  loving  husband  and  father 
and  was  highly  respected  by  his  as- 
sociates in  the  Church.  He  died,  as 
stated,  July  23,  1899,  at  Upper  Kanab. 

SMITH,  Joseph  Ernest,  third  Bishop 
of  the  Lehi  4th  Ward,  Lehi  Stake, 
Utah   Co.,   Utah,   was    born   Jan.   28, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


167 


1887,  in  Lehi,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Samuel  A.  Smith  and  Harriet  Jane 
Webb.  He  was  raised  in  his  birthplace, 
and  there  attended  the  public  schools 
and  also  the  High  School.  Later  he 
studied  at  the  A.  C.  in  Logan  fi-om 
which  he  graduated  in  1909.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  14,  1895,  by  William 
Lawrence  Hill.  In  taking  an  active  part 
in  Church  matters,  he  was  ordained 
successively  to  the  offices  of  Teacher, 
Priest  and  Elder,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Nov.  11,  1919,  by  Seymour  B.  Young, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwest- 
ern States  in  1919-1921,  laboring 
principally  in  Montana  (19  months), 
part  of  the  time  as  president  of  the 
Montana  Conference.  At  home  he 
labored  as  a  home  missionary  in  the 
Alpine  Stake  two  years,  and  also  acted 
as  secretary  of  the  Ward  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  14,  1923,  by  James  E.  Talmage 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Thomas  L.  Peterson,  which 
position  he  held  until  Oct.  24,  1926, 
when  he  was  sustained  as  Bishop  of 
the  Lehi  4th  Ward.  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Oct.  30,  1926,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards  at  a  stake  conference  held 
at  American  Fork.  In  1916  (June  16) 
he  married  Mary  Elizabeth  Fox,  which 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  two 
children,  viz:  Utella  and  Ernest  J. 

In  1933  and  1934  Bishop  Smith 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Lehi  city 
council,  and  is  at  present  a  director 
of  the  Pleasant  Grove  National  Farm 
Loan  Association.  He  is  a  farmer  by 
avocation  and  is  numbered  among  the 
leading  citizens  of  Lehi. 

SMITH,  Nicholas  Groesbeck,  presi- 
dent of  the  California  Mission,  and 
eighth  Bishop  of  the  17th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  was  born  June  20,  1881, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Apostle  John  Henry  Smith  and  Joseph- 
ine Groesbeck.  He  was  baptized  on 
the  eighth  anniversary  of  his  birth- 
day, June  20,  1889,  by  his  father. 
When  three  years  old  he  accompanied 
his  mother  to  Great  Britain,  his  father 


at  that  time  presiding  over  the  Euro- 
pean Mission.  After  I'eturning  to 
Utah  with  his  mother  in  1884  he  re- 
ceived a  common  school  education, 
first  in  Salt  Lake  City  and  afterwards 


in  Snowflake,  Arizona,  and  Manassa, 
Colorado,  where  his  mother's  family 
spent  about  ten  years  while  in  exile  on 
account  of  the  anti-polygamy  perse- 
cutions. Apostle  John  Henry  Smith, 
during  that  period  only  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  visiting  that  part  of  his  fam- 
ily occasionally.  Returning  to  Salt 
Lake  City  in  1897,  Nicholas  G.  at- 
tended High  School  from  which  he 
graduated  in  1902.  From  his  earliest 
youth  he  took  an  active  part  in  Sunday 
school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  work,  acting 
as  librarian  of  the  Sunday  school.  He 
was  ordained  a  Deacon  and  Priest  suc- 
cessively and  later  ordained  an  Elder 
by  his  father;  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Netherlands  in  1902-1905,  during 
which  he  acted  part  of  the  time  as 
president  of  the  Amsterdam  Confer- 
ence and  was  the  instrument  of  add- 
ing thirty  new  converts  to  the  gospel 
by  baptism.  After  his  return  from 
that  mission  he  acted  as  a  counselor  in 
the  17th  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  and  as  a 
Sunday  school  teacher.  He  was  also 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  became  a 
member  of  the  Third  Quorum  of  Sev- 


168 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


enty.  In  1906  (Dec.  20th)  he  married 
Florence  Gay  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple, which  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  four  children,  namely,  Girard 
Gay,  John  Henry,  Stanford  Groesbeck 
and  Nicholas  Groesbeck.  On  Septem- 
ber 1st,  1913,  he  was  called  by  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith  to  preside  over  the 
South  African  Mission.  He  left  Salt 
Lake  City  with  his  family  Sept.  15, 
1913  and  had  charge  of  a  party  of  mis- 
sionaries crossing  the  Atlantic  Ocean. 
He  arrived  in  Cape  Town,  South 
Africa,  Oct.  28,  1913  and  succeeded 
Frank  J.  Hewlett,  Oct  30th.  During 
his  administration  the  mission  pros- 
pered and  he  reports  with  pleasure 
that  the  Saints  in  the  South  African 
mission  rank  at  the  head  of  the  list 
of  all  missions  in  the  world  as  tithe 
payers.  After  presiding  eight  years 
in  South  Africa  he  left  Cape  Town  for 
home  Mai'ch  11,  1921,  being  succeeded 
by  James  Wylie  Sessions.  On  his  re- 
turn with  his  family  he  traveled 
through  war-stricken  Europe  and 
among  other  places  visited  the  battle 
field  of  Verdun  where  everything 
seemed  to  be  in  ruins  from  the  effects 
of  the  war.  Soon  after  his  return 
home  (May  16,  1921)  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  Rudger 
Clawson  and  set  apart  as  a  member 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  High  Council 
which  position  he  held  until  Oct.  22, 
1922,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  James  E.  Talmage  and  set  apart 
to  succeed  Franklin  S.  Tingey  as  Bish- 
op of  the  17th  Ward  with  Harold  W. 
Langton  as  his  first  and  Amer  E.  Han- 
sen as  his  second  counselor.  Prior  to 
this  he  was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Bish- 
op Smith's  occupation  in  a  secular  way 
is  that  of  manager  of  the  Deseret 
Bank  Building.  Formerly  he  acted 
as  manager  of  the  Mountain  States 
Telegraph  and  Telephone  Company. 
As  a  Bishop,  with  the  experience  of 
a  missionary  abroad  and  president  of 
a  mission,  he  has  become  popular  with 
the  members  of  his  ward,  possessing 


the  confidence   and   good   will  of  the 
whole  community. 

SORENSEN,  Christian  W.,  second 
counselor  in  the  North  Sanpete  Stake 
presidency  from  1906  to  1914,  was 
born  Nov.  1,  1863,  in  Mount  Pleasant, 


Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Christian 
and  Christine  Sorensen.  He  was  edu- 
cated in  the  public  schools  of  Mount 
Pleasant  and  the  Brigham  Young 
Academy,  Pi-ovo,  taught  school  in 
Mount  Pleasant  for  fourteen  years, 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and 
filled  a  special  mission  in  the  Manti 
Temple  in  1889-1890.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  from  1892  to  1894, 
presiding  part  of  the  time  over  the 
Aarhus  Conference,  Denmark.  When 
the  North  Sanpete  Stake  was  organ- 
ized in  1900  he  was  appointed  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  and  later  act- 
ed as  second  counselor  to  Stake  Presi- 
dent C.  N.  Lund.  He  held  this  posi- 
tion until  the  stake  presidency  was 
reorganized  in  1914. 

In  1917,  Elder  Sorensen  and  his 
wife,  Eva  M.,  performed  a  short  term 
mission  in  California  and  were  assign- 
ed to  labor  in  San  Diego,  where  their 
daughter  Ruby,  who  had  been  in  the 
California  Mission  six  months,  was 
laboring.     Bro.  Sorensen's  missionary 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


169 


field  of  labor  was  chiefly  among   the 
soldiers  of  the  145th  Artillery,  a  Utah 
unit    quartered    at    Camp     Kearney. 
Many   of  the   soldiers   attended   Sun- 
day School  (of  which  Elder  Sorensen 
was  superintendent)  and  took  part  in 
other  Church  activities.    The  Sorensen 
home,  which  was  near  the  chapel  at 
San    Diego,    was    a    rendezvous    for 
many  of  the  soldier  boys,  and  Sister 
Sorensen  proved  herself  a  real  mother 
to  them  while  in  their  midst.    Besides 
being  a  faithful  Church  worker,   El- 
der Sorensen  has  held  many  civil  po- 
sitions, such  as  city  recorder,  assessor 
and  collector,  councilman,  member  of 
the  House  of  Representatives  in  the 
Utah  Legislatui'e,  member  of  the  dis- 
trict  school   board   and    has   followed 
the  business  of  banking  and  farming. 
In   April,   1886,   he   married   Dina   A. 
Hansen,  who  died  Sept.  27,  1888,  after 
bearing   two   children.      On   June   24, 
1891,  he  married  Eva  Madsen  of  Manti 
who  bore  him  three  children.     Elder 
Sorensen  is  still  an  active  and  leading 
man  in  public  affairs  in  Mount  Pleas- 
ant.    Since  June  16,  1929,  he  has  been 
president  of  the  High  Priests'  Quorum 
of  the  North   Sanpete  Stake.     He  is 
also  serving  his  third  term  as  Concili- 
ation Commissioner  for  Sanpete  and 
Juab  counties,  under  appointment  by 
the  Hon.  Tillman   D.  Johnson,  Judge 
of  the   United   States    District   Court 
for  the  District  of  Utah  under  Act  of 
Congress  of  March  3,  193-3,  known  as 
the  Debtors'  Relief  Law. 

TOWLER,  Thomas  Edgar,  president 
of  the  Wells  Stake,  Salt  Lake  City. 
Utah,  was  born  Sept.  3,  1885,  in  Mill 
Creek,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  a  son  of  Daniel 
Towler  and  Sarah  Ann  Durnford,  the 
ninth  of  a  family  of  ten  children.  His 
parents  came  to  Utah  in  1863,  his  fa- 
ther from  Cardiff,  "Wales,  and  his 
mother  from  England.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  C.  L.  Miller,  Oct.  5,  1893,  or- 
dained a  Deacon  October  22,  1897,  and 
after  continued  activities  in  the  Aaron- 
ic  Priesthood  was  ordained  an  Elder, 
April  2,  1906.     From  1906  to  1908  he 


filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain, 
where  he  served  as  secretaz-y  of  the 
Leeds  Conference  for  nearly  eight- 
een months  and  had  charge  of  the 
Clayton  Branch  of  that  conference  for 
almost  a  year.  He  married  Amy  Ben- 
nion  in  the  Salt  Lake  .Temple,  Nov. 
18,  1909.  Fi'om  this  union  have  been 
born  four  children,  one  girl  and  three 
boys;  the  three  boys  have  died.  After 
his  marriage  he  served  as  a  counselor 
in  the  Granite  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
and  at  the  same  time  was  president 
of  the  Elders'  Quorum  in  the  Farm- 
ers' Ward  and  filled  other  positions 
from  which  he  was  released  to  become 
superintendent  of  the  Granite  Stake 
Sunday  Schools,  which  position  he  held 
four  years.  On  Feb.  12,  1922,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest,  and  on  Sept. 
11,  1923,  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set 
apart  by  Apostle  Richai-d  R.  Lyman 
to  preside  over  the  Farmers  Ward. 
Upon  the  division  of  that  ward,  July 
20,  1924,  he  was  set  apart  by  Pres. 
Rudger  Clawson  as  Bishop  of  the 
Whittier  Ward  of  the  Grant  Stake. 
This  position  he  held  until  the  organ- 
ization of  the  Wells  Stake  took  place 
on  Dec.  31,  1934,  when  he  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  new  stake 
by  Apostle  George  Albert   Smith. 

On  May  8,  1936,  he  was  chosen  as 
second  vice  chairman  to  Pres.  Harold 
B.  Lee  of  the  Salt  Lake  Region  of  the 
Church  Security  Program.  This  re- 
gion included  sixteen  stakes  in  Salt 
Lake,  Tooele  and  Davis  counties.  La- 
ter he  became  first  vice  president  un- 
der Pres.  Marvin  O.  Ashton.  On  Sept. 
25,  1936,  Pres.  Towler  was  appointed 
Regional  Woi'k  director  and  pui-chas- 
ing  agent  for  the  Salt  Lake  Region 
and  to  assist  in  making  purchases  for 
the  Church  Security  Program.  He  is 
well  fitted  for  his  important  duties, 
having  served  as  secretary-treasurer 
of  the  Danielson  Plow  Company,  and 
as  manager  of  the  Covey  Investment 
Company.  During  ten  years  he  oper- 
ated a  retail  grocery  concern,  increas- 
ing the  business  fi-om  one  to  four 
stores    and    pioneering    the    cash    and 


170 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


carry  system.  He  is  connected  with 
the  Brower-Towler  Motor  Company 
and  the  Towler  Investment  Company, 
of  Salt  Lake  City. 

WALKER,  James  Henson,  first 
Bishop  of  the  Pleasant  Grove  3rd 
Ward,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  Oct. 
12,  1878,  at  Pleasant  Grove,  a  son  of 


Apollos  Benjamin  Walker  and  Sarah 
Jane  Holman,  and  a  grandson  of  Hen- 
son  Walker,  one  of  the  original  pio- 
neers of  Utah.  On  his  eighth  birthday 
anniversary  (Oct.  12,  1886)  he  was 
baptized  by  his  father  and  from  then 
on  took  an  active  part  in  Church  af- 
fairs suited  to  his  age.  He  was  or- 
dained successively  a  Deacon,  a  Priest, 
and  in  due  time  was  ordained  an  El- 
der by  Bishop  James  Cobbley  of  Lin- 
don.  Later  he  became  a  member  of 
the  44th  Quorum  of  Seventy,  and  he 
also  served  in  the  superintendency  of 
the  Pleasant  Grove  Ward  Sunday 
School. 

In  August,  1907,  Bro.  Walker  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Elder  Abel 
J.  Evans,  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Swen  L,  Swenson  of 
the   Pleasant   Grove   Ward.     He  held 


this  position  until  May  6th,  1909,  when 
Pres.  Joseph  F,  Smith  ordained  him 
Bishop  of  the  newly  made  Pleasant 
Grove  3rd  Ward,  where  he  served  un- 
til 1923.  Since  the  organization  of 
the  Timpanogos  Stake,  he  has  been 
active  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil and  he  has  been  a  most  successful 
leader  of  the  Stake  Adult  Aaronic 
Priesthood  group. 

James  H.  Walker's  career  as  an 
educator  has  been  just  as  intensive 
as  his  church  life.  His  early  educa- 
tion was  received  at  Pleasant  Grove, 
and  then  for  one  year  he  attended  the 
high  school  connected  with  the  B.  Y. 
U.  at  Provo.  He  began  his  teaching 
career  when  a  very  young  man,  ad- 
vancing his  own  scholastic  training 
during  the  summer  months  and  in  ex- 
tension work  during  the  winter.  In 
this  manner  he  graduated  from  the 
normal  course  of  the  University  of 
Utah  in  1912,  and  received  his  B.  S.  de- 
gree from  the  same  institution  in  1916. 
He  also  took  graduate  work  at  the 
University  of  Chicago  for  two  sum- 
mers. His  first  three  years  of  teach- 
ing experience  were  at  Lindon;  then 
for  15  years  he  taught  in  the  Pleas- 
ant Grove  schools,  being  steadily  ad- 
vanced from  grade  teacher  to  high 
school  principal,  and  from  this  posi- 
tion to  superintendent  of  the  Alpine 
School  District,  where  he  remained 
six  years. 

At  present  Bro.  Walker  is  a  repre- 
sentative of  the  Macmillan  Publishing- 
Company  of  New  York  and  as  such  he 
is  an  able  factor  in  the  educational 
field.  He  also  finds  time  to  promote 
worthwhile  projects  in  his  home  com- 
munity. He  is  a  prominent  figure  on 
the  Cannery  Board  and  also  of  the 
Bank  of  Pleasant  Grove. 

In  December,  1896,  Elder  Walker 
married  Delia  Cobbley,  daughter  of 
Charles  A.  and  Emma  Cobbley  of  Lin- 
don. Thirteen  children  were  born  of 
this  marriage,  namely:  Charles  Ben- 
jamin, Leo,  Zola,  Rowena,  Thomas 
Arnell,  Legrande,  Calvin,  Edna,  My- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


171 


ron,  Jane,  Muriel,  James  Henson  jun., 
and  Emma.  In  July,  1923,  Mrs.  Walk- 
er died,  and  in  August,  1925,  Bishop 
Walker  married  Josephine  Greenwood, 
daughter  of  Benjamin  and  Jane 
Greenwood  of  American  Fork,  Utah. 
One  son,  Benjamin,  has  been  born  of 
this  marriage. 

At  the  age  of  57,  Bi'o.  Walker  re- 
gards his  12  children  and  18  grand- 
children as  his  greatest  asset.  Twelve 
children  have  graduated  from  Pleas- 
ant Grove  High  School,  four  have  col- 
lege degrees,  one  is  on  a  mission,  and 
the  rest  are  pursuing  educational  stud- 
ies in  various  fields,  and  all  are  active 
members  of  the  Church. 

Bishop  Walker  is  regarded  by  his 
many  friends  in  the  little  community 
of  Pleasant  Grove,  and  throughout  the 
state  of  Utah  and  neighboring  states, 
as  a  valuable  personality,  a  thinker, 
a  man  of  keen  intellect  and  broad  un- 
derstanding. 

WALKER,  Joseph,  a  pioneer  of  Ce- 
dar City,  Utah,  was  born  March  19, 
1813,  at  Bradford,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  Samuel  and  Sarah  Walk- 
er. His  wife,  Betty  Smith  Walker, 
was  born  Oct.  8,  1812,  in  Yorkshire,  a 
daughter  of  Stephen  and  Mary  Smith. 
Bro.  Walker  and  wife  with  their  five 
children,  John  (aged  15  years),  Wil- 
liam, Thomas,  Simeon  and  Mary,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1849,  crossing  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  in  the  ship  "Zetland," 
and  the  plains  in  Capt.  Orson  Spen- 
cer's company,  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sept.  23,  1849.  Bro.  Walker 
bought  a  farm  at  Mill  Creek,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  adjoining  that  of  his 
friend,  Joseph  Wright,  who  also  emi- 
grated from  England  and  had  been  a 
fellow  workman  with  Bi-o.  Walker  in 
the  iron  works  at  Low  Moor,  York- 
shire. In  the  fall  of  1851,  Bro.  Walker 
moved  his  family  to  Parowan,  Iron 
Co.  Later,  directed  by  counsel  of  Pres. 
George  A.  Smith,  he  became  a  mem- 
ber of  a  small  company  led  by  Elder 
Matthew  Curruthers,  who  located  a 
fort  northwest  of  the  Cedar  City  cem- 


etery. In  May,  1854,  Pres.  Young 
visited  the  settlers  and  while  there 
stopped  on  the  present  site  of  Cedar 
City.  Placing  the  point  of  his  staff 
on  the  northwest  corner  of  the  old 
Isaac  C.  Haight  lot,  he  said:  "Build 
west  and  south,  but  go  no  further 
north."  To  build  homes  in  the  newly 
surveyed  city,  lumber,  shingles  and 
lath  were  necessary.  Bro.  Walker  and 
his  sons  were  on  hand  to  supply  these 
things  and  were  engaged  in  the  lum- 
ber business  for  a  number  of  years. 
When  the  Deseret  Iron  Company  was 
organized,  Joseph  Walker  became  a 
prominent  factor  in  it  and  labored 
faithfully  at  the  work  for  which  he 
had  been  so  well  prepared  in  the  iron 
works  in  England.  When  the  iron 
works  were  shut  down,  Bro.  Walker 
returned  to  the  business  of  lumbering 
and  hauling  lumber  to  town.  He  died 
April  25,  1881,  leaving  two  wives  and 
sixteen  children. 

WHITE,  Lizzie  Olivia  Borgeson,  the 

first  lady  missionary  called  from  San- 
taquin,  Utah,  and  the  second  lady  to 


labor  as  a  missionary  in  the  Eastern 
States  Mission,  was  born  April  25, 
1889,  at  Santaquin,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Andrew  Borgeson  and  Necoline 
Emily  Olsen.  Being  the  ninth  daugh- 
ter of  a  family  of  eleven  children,  her 


172 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


training  from  infancy  was  one  of  un- 
selfish co-operation.  Order  and  dis- 
cipline were  a  part  of  her  home  en- 
vironment. There,  family  prayer  was 
part  of  the  day's  routine,  the  Word 
of  Wisdom  was  strictly  adhered  to, 
the  Sabbath  day  observed  as  a  day  of 
rest  and  tithing  paid  by  all  the  family 
to  the  penny.  It  was  taken  for  grant- 
ed that  the  children  were  to  attend 
P*rimary,  Sunday  school  and  sacra- 
ment meetings,  and  being  a  natural 
leader,  Lizzie,  very  early  in  life,  be- 
came class  leader  in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.,  organist  in  the  ward  Primary 
Assn.,  and  a  member  of  the  ward  choir. 
As  a  young  woman  she  attended  the 
Utah  Agricultural  College  at  Logan, 
during  which  time  she  taught  in  Re- 
ligion Classes  in  the  Logan  7th  Ward 
and  was  a  member  of  the  Stake  Tab- 
ernacle Choir.  Upon  completing  a 
commercial  course  at  the  U.  A.  C,  she 
obtained  employment  as  stenographer 
to  Attorney  Geo.  E.  Gray  in  Pocatello, 
Idaho,  and  while  there  served  as  jun- 
ior class  leader  in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A., 
teacher  in  the  Sunday  School,  assist- 
ant organist,  and  choir  member.  Upon 
the  demise  of  her  employer  she  return- 
ed to  Utah  and  entered  the  law  offices 
of  Judge  A.  C.  Hatch  and  Chase  Hatch 
of  Heber  City.  In  1913,  she  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States, 
on  which  she  served  as  stenographer 
in  the  mission  office  in  New  York  City. 
One  other  lady  missionary  was  labor- 
ing there,  but  soon  afterwards  other 
sisters  were  called  and  it  was  Sister 
Borgeson's  duty  to  instruct  them  in 
their  duties  and  see  them  comfortably 
located  in  their  respective  districts. 
In  addition.  Sister  Borgeson  was  ex- 
pected to  meet  trains  and  boats,  car- 
rying female  visitors  to  New  York 
who  had  sent  word  to  mission  head- 
quarters for  someone  to  receive  them 
on  their  arrival.  In  this  way  she  be- 
came as  well  known  to  the  govern- 
ment and  railroad  officials  as  any  of 
the  regular  welfare  workers  from  oth- 
er organizations.     On  one  occasion  a 


faithful  sister,  who  had  presided  over 
the  Relief  Society  in  Oslo,  Norway, 
arrived  at  Ellis  Island  and  was  in- 
formed by  one  of  the  officials  that 
"They  could  not  land  a  Mormon."  For- 
tunately, Sister  Borgeson  was  at  hand 
to  see  that  the  lady  received  proper 
consideration  and  in  doing  so  was  able, 
under  the  inspiration  of  the  Lord,  to, 
explain  to  this  official  and  others, 
many  of  the  principles  of  the  gospel 
and  to  remove  some  misunderstanding 
which  had  arisen,  and  from  that  time 
the  "Mormons"  were  treated  with  due 
courtesy  on  Ellis  Island.  Sister  Bor- 
geson also  had  many  opportunities  to 
visit  different  parts  of  the  mission 
in  company  with  Pres.  Ben  E.  Rich 
and  wife.  She  also  reported  the  mis- 
sion news  to  the  "Liahona,"  and  wrote 
several  articles  for  that  periodical. 

Upon  her  return  from  this  mission 
she  was  employed  by  the  Knight 
Woolen  Mills,  at  Provo,  for  almost  a 
year,  during  which  time  she  success- 
fully taught  a  group  of  boys  in  the 
Provo  4th  Ward  Sunday  School.  She 
was  also  engaged  in  home  missionary 
work  and  was  a  member  of  the  Stake 
Tabernacle  Choir.  Being  offered  a 
position  in  the  office  of  the  Z.  C.  M.  I. 
at  Pocatello,  Idaho,  she  went  north 
and  remained  there  until  the  Z.  C.  M. 
I.  building  was  destroyed  by  fire  in 
1916,  when  she  became  secretary  to 
the  State  Prosecuting  Attorney  and 
had  experience  as  a  court  reporter  in 
criminal  cases.  During  this  time  she 
was  a  member  of  the  Stake  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  Board  and  organized  and  con- 
ducted a  junior  choir  in  the  Pocatello 
3rd  Ward.  In  1918  she  became  asso- 
ciated with  the  Utah-Idaho  Sugar 
Company  at  Garland,  Utah,  as  senior 
stenographer,  boarding  at  the  time 
with  the  family  of  Bishop  Chas. 
Munns,  where  she  met  a  Mr.  Lucian 
Elmer  White  of  Springfield,  111.,  who 
was  investigating  the  gospel  and  was 
soon  afterwards  baptized  by  Bishop 
Munns.  The  two  young  people  hav- 
ing many  interests  in  common,  such 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


173 


as  the  enjoyment  of  music,  literature 
and  exercise  in  the  great  out-doors, 
their  friendship  culminated  in  a  ro- 
mance which  led  to  their  marriage  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  March  31,  1919; 
a  daughter  (Venita  Annette)  was 
born  to  them,  Sept.  15,  1920.  In  the 
spring  of  1919,  Bro.  and  Sister  White 
located  in  Twin  Falls,  where  Bro. 
White  engaged  in  business  and  Sister 
White  was  secretary  to  J.  C.  Wheelon, 
of  the  Twin  Falls  Canal  Co.  She 
continued  her  Church  activities,  serv- 
ing as  a  counselor  in  the  ward  Relief 
Society,  teacher  of  the  advanced  theo- 
logical class  in  Sunday  School  and 
assistant  chorister  and  bee-keeper. 

Her  marriage,  however,  was  not 
successful,  and  in  July,  1922,  the 
young  couple  obtained  a  divorce.  Lo- 
cating in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sister  White 
was  employed  first  in  the  office  of  Hy- 
rum  E.  Crockett,  Secretary  of  State, 
and  later  in  the  office  of  the  Wm.  J. 
Burns  International  Detective  Agency. 
In  April,  1924,  she  became  secretary 
to  the  superintendent  of  the  Dr. 
Groves  L.  D.  S.  Hospital,  a  position 
which  she  holds  at  present.  Sister 
White  was  a  member  of  the  McCune 
School  of  Music  Symphony  Orchestra, 
of  the  L.  D.  S.  Band  and  Orchestra 
and  the  Girls  M.  I.  A.  Band.  Her 
daughter  has  inherited  this  artistic 
temperament  to  a  marked  degree  and 
has  made  several  public  appearances 
in  concerts  as  the  star  performer  on 
several  instruments.  The  greatest  re- 
sponsibility in  life  to  Sister  White,  at 
the  present  time,  is  to  guide  this  pre- 
cious daughter  into  paths  of  righteous 
living,  and  she  feels  that  the  greatest 
mission  in  life  for  any  woman  is  that 
of  motherhood. 

WOOLLEY,  Ralph  Edwin,  superin- 
tendent of  the  erection  of  the  Ha- 
waiian Temple,  was  born  March  4, 
1886,  at  Grantsville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Samuel  Edwin  Woolley  and  Alice  Row- 
berry.  He  was  baptized  in  the  spring 
of  1894  at  Skull  Valley,  Utah,  by  Wm. 
W.  Cluff,  and  a  year  later  accompa- 


nied his  parents  to  Hawaii,  where  his 
father  presided  over  the  Mission  from 
1895  to  1919.  Bro.  Ralph  Edwin  was 
ordained  a  Deacon  at  Laie,  Oahu,  in 
1898,   by  his   father,  and   ordained   a 


Priest  at  Honolulu  in  1900  by  Wm.  G. 
Sears,  president  of  the  Samoan  Mis- 
sion, after  which  he  assisted  in  mis- 
sionary work  in  Hawaii.  After  re- 
turning to  Grantsville,  Utah,  in  1905, 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  J.  Reu- 
ben Clark,  sen.  He  attended  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  and  received  the  de- 
gree of  B.  S.  in  engineering  in  1912. 
He  also  received  the  degree  of  B.  S. 
from  the  Agricultural  College  of  the 
Utah  Engineering  School  in  1914.  In 
1916,  he  was  commissioned  by  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith  to  superintend  the 
erection  of  the  Temple  at  Laie,  Oahu, 
Hawaii.  This  work  was  accomplished 
in  a  most  satisfactory  manner,  and  the 
building  and  settings  now  attract  the 
attention  of  all  visitors. 

On  Sept.  19,  1933,  Elder  Woolley 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Pres. 
Castle  H.  Murphy  and  set  apart  as 
chairman  of  the  Hawaiian  Mission 
High  Council,  and  when  the  Oahu 
Stake  was  organized  June  30,  1935, 
he  was  chosen  as  president  of  the 
same.  This  was  the  first  stake  of  Zion 
organized    outside    of    the    American 


174 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


continent.  Elder  Woolley  was  set 
apart  to  this  office  July  1,  1935,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant.  In  June,  1936, 
he  was  appointed  by  the  First  Presi- 
dency as  chairman  of  the  L.  D.  S.  Ha- 
waiian Temple  Committee.  Pres. 
Woolley  married  Romania  H.  Hyde, 
Dec.  8,  1920;  they  have  one  little 
daughter  named  Virginia  Jeanette. 

WRIGHT,  Lehi,  Bishop  of  Marsh 
Center  Ward,  Bannock  Co.,  Idaho, 
from  1891  to  1901,  was  born  April  1, 


1856,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Jonathan  C.  and  Mary  Jane  Wright. 
He  was  baptized  April  25,  1864,  by 
William  Neeley  and  confirmed  the 
same  day  by  his  father.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Priest  Aug.  12,  1882,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  ordained  a 
Seventy  July  17,  1884,  by  William 
Woodward  and  became  a  member  of 
the  18th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  At  the 
age  of  fourteen  he  left  home  to  work 
in  the  tie  camps  of  the  Union  Pacific 
Railroad  in  Idaho  and  Wyoming.  After 
this  he  lived  for  several  years  in  Gen- 
tile Valley  and  Soda  Springs,  Idaho, 
and  in  the  spring  of  1887  went  to 
Marsh  Center  to  close  out  the  busi- 
ness affairs  of  Bishop  Melvin  L.  Gru- 
well,  who  had  moved  to  Mexico.  At 
Marsh   Center   he   became   acquainted 


with  Mary  Hawkins  (daughter  of  Carl 
W.  Hawkins,  formerly  a  resident  of 
Plain  City,  Utah),  whom  he  married 
Sept.  12,  1888;  six  sons  and  one  daugh- 
ter were  boi-n  of  this  marriage.  El- 
der Wright  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
of  Marsh  Center  Ward  Nov.  5,  1891, 
and  on  Jan.  27,  1892,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Apostle 
Marriner  W.  Merrill  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Marsh  Center  Ward, 
which  position  he  held  until  Dec.  19, 
1901.  In  February,  1903,  he  moved 
to  La  Grande,  Oregon,  where  he  en- 
gaged in  farming  and  fruit  raising, 
and  also  labored  as  a  home  mission- 
ary. At  the  time  of  his  death  which 
occui-red  at  La  Grande,  Oregon,  Nov. 
28,  1930,  Bishop  Wright  was  presi- 
dent of  a  High  Priests'  Quorum. 

YOST,  Fred,  second  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  the  Idaho  Stake,  was 
born  April  30,  1892,  at  Langnau,  Switz- 
erland, a  son  of  Christian  Yost  and 
Anna   Gerber.     He  came  to  America 


(^ 


with  his  parents  in  1896,  crossing  the 
ocean  in  the  ship  "Circassia."  The 
family  located  in  Providence,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  where  the  boy  later  received 
his  schooling  and  he  also  attended  the 
Utah  Agricultural  College  at  Logan. 
He  was  baptized  May  1,  1900,  by  Sam- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


175 


uel  Stillman,  ordained  a  Deacon  when 
twelve  years  of  age  by  Godfrey  Fuhri- 
man  and  acted  as  a  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  a  Deacons'  quorum.  At 
fifteen  years  of  age  he  was  ordained 
a  Teacher  and  on  Sept.  27,  1909,  was 
ordained  a  Priest  by  C.  M.  Hammond. 
After  being  ordained  an  Elder  Dec. 
15,  1913,  by  Joseph  Campbell,  he  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  from 
Nov.  8,  1915,  to  Oct.  10,  1917,  laboring 
in  the  Michigan  Conference.  After  re- 
turning home  he  acted  as  Sunday 
School  teacher,  class  leader,  and  latei- 
as  a  counselor  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  and 
as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Cache 
Stake.  In  the  spring  of  1920  he  moved 
to  Bancroft,  Idaho,  where  he  served 
as  presidejit  of  the  First  Quorum  of 
Elders  in  the  Idaho  Stake  from  1923 
to  1927,  and  was  a  member  of  the 
Idaho  Stake  Sunday  School  Board; 
later  he  acted  as  a  counselor  in  the 
superintendency  of  that  board.  On 
Dec.  31,  1927,  he  was  sustained  as 
Stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools,  and  served  in  that  position 
until  October,  1934.  Elder  Yost  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  31,  1927,  by 
Rulon  S.  Wells  and  served  as  a  presi- 
dent of  the  197th  Quorum  of  Seventy 
for  seven  years.  On  Sept.  2,  1934,  he 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Rich- 
ard R.  Lyman  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Alonzo  J.  Gilbert  of  the 
Idaho  Stake  Presidency.  In  a  civil 
capacity  he  served  as  a  member  of 
the  North  Gem  school  board  for  seven 
years,  acting  as  chairman  of  the  board 
for  three  years. 

On  November  24,  1914,  he  married 
Bertha  P.  Humphreys,  daughter  of 
Jesse  B.  Humphreys  and  Elmina  Gra- 
ham. This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  eleven  children,  namely,  Glenn  F., 
Delva  P.,  Thad  O.,  Lois  M.,  Date  E., 
Clotiel,  Erma,  Nelda,  Udeane,  Ha  Rae 
and  ReNae.  Pres.  Yost  is  a  farmer 
and  stock-raiser  by  avocation. 

REYNOLDS,  Harold  G.,  Bishop  of 
the  Twenty-first  Ward,  Ensign  Stake, 
since  1924,  was  born  Nov.  18,  1883,  in 


Salt  Lake  City,  a  son  of  George  Rey- 
nolds and  Mary  Ann  Tuddenham.  He 
was  educated  in  the  public  schools  of 


Salt  Lake  City,  the  L.  D.  S.  College 
and  did  extension  work  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  1, 
1891,  by  Bp.  Robert  Morris,  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  June  20,  1895,  by 
Wm.  Asper,  an  Elder  Feb.  9,  1903,  by 
Herbert  J.  Shimming,  a  Seventy  Jan. 
9,  1912,  by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  and  a  High 
Priest  March  22,  1922,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards.  Elder  Reynolds  filled  a 
mission  to  Germany  from  February, 
1903  to  November,  1905,  and  labored 
as  a  missionary  in  London,  England, 
from  November,  1905  to  April  1906. 
In  November,  1906,  he  was  chosen  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union  and  re- 
leased from  that  position  in  October, 
1927,  on  account  of  his  responsibilities 
as  Bishop.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
Ensign  Stake  High  Council  in  1922  and 
1923.  On  Jan.  27,  1924,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Pres.  Heber  J. 
Grant  and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
21st  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  which 
position  he  still  holds  (1936).  In 
November,  1906,  Elder  Reynolds  was 
called  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  to  as- 


176 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sist  his  father,  George  Reynolds  in  the 
missionary  department  of  the  Church. 
After  the  death  of  George  Reynolds 
in  1909,  Elder  Reynolds  was  appointed 
mission  secretary  of  the  Church  by 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith,  his  duties  in- 
cluding the  preparation  of  missiona- 
ries, arranging  for  their  transporta- 
tion, visas,  steamship  passage,  railroad 
transportation,  etc.  In  this  capacity, 
he  has  superintended  the  preparation 
and  travel  of  over  25,000  missionaries 
to  different  parts  of  the  United  States, 
Canada,  Mexico,  South  America,  South 
Africa,  South  Sea  Islands,  and  differ- 
ent missions  in  Europe. 

Bishop  Reynolds  was  a  member  of 
the  Exchange  Club.  He  is  now  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Traffic  Club  of  Salt  Lake 
City  and  was  president  of  this  organi- 
zation from  1934  to  1935.  He  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Sons  of  Utah  Pioneers. 

In  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  on  June  23, 
1911,  Elder  Reynolds  married  Ann 
Amelia  Howarth,  of  Salt  Lake  City 
(daughter  of  Nephi  Howarth  and 
Amelia  Elizabeth  Price).  This  mar- 
riage has  been  blessed  with  four  chil- 
dren, namely,  Elizabeth,  Harold  G., 
jun.,  Ralph  Howarth  and  Marian. 

SUMMERHAYS,     Caleb     Ephraim, 

senior  president  of  the  3rd  quorum 
of  Seventy,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  April  27,  1871,  a  son  of  Joseph 
William  Summerhays  (born  Jan.  15, 
1847,  at  Pimlico,  England)  and  Mary 
Melissa  Parker  Summerhays  (born  at 
Kanesville,  Iowa,  May  21,  1852).  On 
May  1,  1879,  Caleb  E.  was  baptized  by 
John  Cottam  in  Dimick  B.  Hunting- 
ton's font  on  3i'd  West  Street,  between 
1st  and  2nd  North  streets;  he  was 
confirmed  on  the  same  date  by  Bishop 
Frederick  Kesler.  About  1884  he  was 
ordained  to  the  office  of  a  Deacon 
and  later  to  the  office  of  a  Priest,  and 
while  holding  the  latter  office  assisted 
the  older  brethren  in  block  teaching. 
From  1884  to  1889  he  attended  the 
District  School  and  the  L.  D.  S.  Busi- 
ness  College  and  in  his   leisure  time 


worked  for  the  Rowe  Morris  Summer- 
hays Company,  hide  and  wool  mer- 
chants. Hyrum  M.  and  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  sons  of  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
were  his  nearest  friends  during  his 
boyhood  days  and  in  the  year  1889,  he 
and  Hyrum  M.  Smith  were  called  on 
a  home  mission  by  Pres.  Smith. 

In  1890  Bro.  Summerhays  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Samoan  Islands. 
He  received  his  endowments  May  22, 
1890,  in  the  Logan  Temple  and  on 
June  17,  1890,  was  oi'dained  a  Seventy 
by  B.  H.  Roberts  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  24th  Quorum  of  Seventy. 
A  few  days  later  he  left  his  home  for 
Samoa,  arriving  on  the  island  of  Upolu, 
July  14,  1890.  He  labored  on  the 
island  of  Upolu  most  of  the  time,  for 
several  months  as  president  of  the 
Siupapa  Branch.  After  laboring  faith- 
fully as  a  missionary  for  three  years 
he  left  Apia  Aug.  16,  1893.  Soon 
after  his  return  (on  Nov.  9,  1893)  he 
married  Ellen  Louise  Barret  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  She  was  born  Jan. 
14,  1871,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 
From  1903  to  1907  Elder  Summerhays 
was  employed  by  the  Rowe  Morris 
Summerhays  Company  as  a  purchas- 
ing agent  on  the  road,  buying  hides, 
wool  and  furs.  During  this  time  he 
acted  as  a  home  missionary  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake. 

From  1907  to  1910  he  filled  a  second 
foreign  mission,  laboring  on  this  oc- 
casion in  England,  and  presided  over 
the  Preston  Branch,  with  Frank  R. 
Smith  (son  of  Joseph  F.  Smith)  as  his 
companion.  After  six  months  he  was 
called  to  labor  in  the  Burnley  Branch 
with  Urban  Johnson  as  his  companion, 
and  during  their  stay  there  they  bap- 
tized about  thirty  converts.  Some 
time  after  his  return  home,  his  father 
Jos.  W.  Summerhays,  his  brother 
Joshua  James  Summerhays,  and  him- 
self bought  out  the  Rowe  Morris  and 
Summex'hays  Company,  which  has 
since  been  operated  as  the  J.  W.  Sum- 
merhays and  Sons  Co.  and  which  is 
still   a  growing   concern.     Bi-o.   Sum- 


BI0GRAPHIC4L  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


177 


merhays   has  belonged  to  the   Taber- 
nacle  and   Seventeenth   Ward   choirs, 


^  4^ 


has  been  a  member  of  the  3rd  quorum 
of  Seventy  for  39  years,  was  one  of 
the  presidency  of  that  quorum  for  9 
years  and  is  now  senior  president. 
Since  1930  he  has  presided  over  Dis- 
trict No.  2  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Home  Mission  which  is  composed  of 
the  14th,  17th  and  Capitol  Hill  wards. 

SUMMERHAYS.  Ellen  Louise  Bar- 


ret,  wife   of   Caleb    E.    Summerhays, 
was  born  Jan.  14,  1871,  in  Salt  Lake 


VoL  rv.  No.  12 


City,  the  daughter  of  Clarence  Bar- 
rett and  Georgianna  Robbins.  Her 
mother  was  born  on  the  ship  "Brook- 
lyn" which  carried  a  company  of 
Saints  from  New  York  to  San  Fran- 
cisco in  1846.  Sister  Summerhays  has 
been  active  in  the  auxiliary  organiza- 
tions of  the  Church  and  has  served  as 
class  leader  and  teacher  in  Relief  So- 
ciety, Religion  Classes  and  Y.  L. 
M.  L  A. 

*> "ic<*^Vsi>— — <• 

GENERAL  BOARD  OF  RELIEF 
SOCIETY 

ALDER,  Elise  Benson,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
since  March  25,  1925,  was  born  March 
10,  1873,  at  Logan,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Bishop  George  Taft  Benson  and 
Louisa  Ballif.  She  is  a  granddaugh- 
ter of  Apostle  Ezra  T.  Benson  and 
Elder  Serge  Louis  Ballif,  former  pres- 
ident of  the  Swiss  and  German  Mis- 
sion. She  attended  the  Agricultural 
College  at  Logan  and  taught  for  three 
years  in  the  Oneida  Stake  Academy, 
and  in  a  Church  capacity  has  been  an 
officer  in  every  woman's  auxiliary  or- 
ganization of  the  Church.  Previous 
to  being  called  to  the  General  Board, 
she  was  president  of  the  Ensign  Stake 
Relief  Society,  for  some  years.  She 
is  the  wife  of  George  Alfred  Alder, 
jun.,  of  Salt  Lake  City,  and  mother  of 
six  children. 

ALLEN,  Inez  Knight,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
since  August  17,  1927,  was  born  on  a 
ranch  near  Payson,  Utah,  Sept.  8, 1876, 
a  daughter  of  Jesse  Knight  and  Aman- 
da McEwan.  She  received  a  univer- 
sity education  and  was  dean  of  women 
at  the  B.  Y.  U.  at  Provo  from  1900 
to  1902.  During  the  World  war  she 
served  as  county  chairman  of  the 
Women's  Council  of  Defense,  of  the 
Women's  Liberty  Loan  Committee 
and  vice  chairman  of  the  Utah  County 
Red  Cross,  and  was  also  a  member  of 
the  State  Welfare  Commission.  She 
was  a  Utah  delegate  to  the  National 
Democratic   Convention   in   1928,  and 

March  21,  1986 


178 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


179 


was  elected  a  member  of  the  National 
Women's  Democratic  Committee  in 
1928.  Sister  Allen  was  president  of 
the  Utah  Stake  Relief  Society  from 
1918  to  1924,  and  initiated  the  Com- 
munity Welfare  Department  in  Provo. 
She  was  married  to  Robert  Eugene 
Allen  June  11,  1902,  and  all  but  one 
of  their  five  children  have  filled  mis- 
sions for  the  Church,  Sister  Inez 
Knight  (Allen)  was  one  of  the  first 
two  regularly  called  women  mission- 
aries in  the  Church  and  served  in  Eng- 
land from  April,  1898,  to  June,  1900. 

BARBER,  Adeline  Hatch,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  from  1893  to  1898,  was  born 
Jan.  26,  1834,  at  Lincoln,  Maddison  Co., 
Vermont,  a  daughter  of  Hezekiah 
Hatch  and  Aldura  Sumner.  She  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1848,  as  an  exile 
from  Nauvoo.  She  was  married  to 
George  Barber  in  Salt  Lake  City  in 
1852,  and  later  moved  to  Cache  Val- 
ley, where  she  did  much  to  encourage 
sericulture,  and  manufactured  the  silk 
used  in  the  black  silk  dress  presented 
by  Utah  women  to  Susan  B.  Anthony 
and  worn  by  the  latter  during  several 
conventions.  Sister  Barber  was  presi- 
dent of  the  Retrenchment  Society  at 
Smithfield,  Utah,  for  eight  years; 
counselor  in  the  Cache  Stake  Primary 
Association  for  three  years  and  presi- 
dent of  that  organization  14  years.  She 
was  a  counselor  in  the  Relief  Society 
at  Smithfield  for  nine  years,  and  pres- 
ident of  that  organization  for  nine 
years.  For  22  years  she  served  as  a 
worker  in  the  Logan  Temple  and  died 
in  Logan,  Utah,  March  5,  1918. 

BARKER,  Kate  M.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
since  Feb.  20,  1929,  and  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  that  organ- 
ization since  1935,  was  born  May  30, 
1881,  at  North  Ogden,  Utah,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Nathaniel  Montgomery  and 
Nancy  Clark.  She  was  educated  in 
the  public  schools,  graduated  from 
high  school  and  taught  school  four 
years.    Previous  to  this  she  was  presi- 


dent of  the  33rd  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Primary  Association  for  one  year,  and 
a  member  of  the  Relief  Society  Board 
of  Liberty  Stake  for  two  years.  On 
May  30,  1906,  she  was  married  to 
James  L.  Barker,  head  of  the  Modern 
Language  Department  of  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah,  and  a  member  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union  Board. 
She  is  the  mother  of  one  son  and  two 
daughters.  With  her  husband  and 
children,  Sister  Barker  has  traveled 
extensively  in  the  United  States  and 
in  Europe.  Four  times  she  has  so- 
journed in  Europe,  her  residence  there 
covering  a  period  of  eight  years,  dur- 
ing which  she  studied  in  Neuchatel, 
Switzerland,  and  at  the  University  of 
Paris.  At  home  she  is  active  in  edu- 
cational work  for  the  Church  and  State 
and  is  an  outstanding  member  of  the 
U.  of  U.  Women's  Club. 

BAXTER,    Lotta    Robina    Paul,    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  since  April  2,  1921,  was 
born  Feb.  14,  1870,  a  daughter  of 
James  Patten  Paul  and  Elizabeth 
Evans.  She  was  educated  in  the  grade 
schools  of  Salt  Lake  City  and  the  Uni- 
versity of  Deseret  and  took  a  special 
course  in  literature  at  the  University 
of  Utah.  At  nine  years  of  age  she 
served  as  secretary  of  a  ward  Pri- 
mary Association,  later  as  secretary, 
teacher  and  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  of  the  10th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Y.  L 
M.  I.  A.  Board,  and  upon  the  division 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  in  1904,  was 
appointed  president  of  the  Liberty 
Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  which  position 
she  held  until  called  to  serve  on  the 
General  Board  of  Relief  Society.  Thus 
she  has  an  unbroken  record  of  office 
in  auxiliary  organizations  since  she 
was  nine  years  of  age.  In  1896  she 
was  married  to  Samuel  Emerson  Bax- 
ter, a  widower  with  six  children.  She 
became  the  mother  of  four  children 
and  has  proved  a  splendid  mother  to 
all,   including   one   motherless  grand- 


180 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BEAL,  Ida  Peterson,  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Relief  Society  since 
Aug.  17,  1927,  and  also  chairman  of 
the  Music  Committee  of  that  organ- 
ization, was  born  Feb.  7,  1876,  at  Eph- 
raim,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Canute  Pe- 
terson and  Charlotte  Eckstrom.  She 
was  educated  at  the  Sanpete  Stake 
Academy  (now  Snow  College)  and  at 
the  B.  Y.  U.  and  studied  music  under 
Prof.  A.  C.  Lund.  On  June  19,  1901, 
she  was  married  in  the  Manti  Temple 
to  Thomas  A.  Beal  of  the  University 
of  Utah,  and  in  1925-1926,  spent  ten 
months  in  Europe  with  him  studying 
and  traveling.  Music  and  gardening 
are  her  hobbies. 

BEATIE,  Phoebe  Louisa  Y.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  So- 
ciety from  1901  to  1921,  was  born 
Aug.  1,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Brigham  Young  and 
Clarissa  Ross  Chase.  She  was  a  char- 
ter member  of  the  Young  Ladies'  Re- 
trenchment Association,  of  the  Daugh- 
ters of  Utah  Pioneers  and  of  the  Utah 
Chapter  of  the  Daughters  of  the  Rev- 
olution. She  was  chairman  and  sec- 
retary of  the  Relief  Society  Nurse 
School  from  1902  to  1910,  in  which 
capacity  she  took  students  into  her 
own  home  free  of  charge  until  they 
could  be  placed  to  earn  their  board. 
For  many  yeai's  she  was  a  Temple 
worker.  She  was  a  delegate  to  the 
International  Council  of  Women  at 
Washington,  D.  C,  in  1891,  and  en- 
tertained Susan  B.  Anthony  and  other 
noted  women  at  her  home.  On  Jan. 
17,  1872,  she  was  married  to  Walter 
J.  Beatie  and  became  the  mother  of 
seven  children.  She  died  Aug.  22, 
1931,  in  Salt  Lake  City.  (See  also 
Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p. 
593). 

BENNION,  Cora  Lindsay,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  So- 
ciety since  April  2,  1921,  was  born 
Dec.  9,  1874,  in  Taylorsville,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Joseph  S. 
Lindsay   and   Emma   Bennion,   and   a 


granddaughter  of  Bishop  Samuel 
Bennion,  pioneer  of  1847.  She  re- 
ceived her  education  at  the  public 
schools,  at  the  L.  D.  S.  College  and 
at  the  University  of  Utah,  and  with 
her  husband  spent  the  summer  of  1899 
at  the  University  of  Chicago  and  the 
school  year  of  1912-1913  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  Wisconsin;  before  her  mar- 
riage she  taught  school  for  one  year. 
She  has  also  served  as  secretary,  or- 
ganist and  visiting  teacher  in  the  For- 
est Dale  Ward  Relief  Society.  On 
June  22,  1898,  she  was  married  to  Mil- 
ton Bennion  of  the  University  of  Utah 
and  became  the  mother  of  ten  chil- 
dren. She  served  as  president  of  the 
University  of  Utah  Women's  Club  for 
one  year. 

BRADFORD,  Nettie  Maria,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  since  March  25,  1925,  was 
born  March  17,  1873,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  Albert  W,  Davis 
and  Melissa  Jane  Lambson.  She  has 
had  extended  experience  in  Church 
organizations  and  for  four  years  was 
an  ordinance  worker  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  As  a  Relief  Society  worker 
she  has  served  as  a  special  mission- 
ary and  class  leader  in  Center  Ward, 
and  as  a  counselor  and  later  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Relief 
Society.  While  holding  the  latter  po- 
sition she  introduced  family  registra- 
tion cards,  a  feature  later  adopted 
throughout  the  Church.  She  has  also 
been  an  active  worker  in  parent- 
teacher  associations.  Daughters  of 
Utah  Pioneers,  University  of  Utah 
Women's  Club  and  in  work  for  the 
adult  blind.  On  Dec.  22,  1896,  she  was 
married  to  Dr.  Robert  H.  Bradford, 
head  of  the  metallurgical  department 
of  the  University  of  Utah  and  is  the 
mother  of  three  sons  and  two  daugh- 
ters. 

BROWN,  Harriet  Canfield,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  from  Oct.  10,  1892,  to  Dec.  18, 
1901,  was  born  March  9,  1834,  at  Os- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


181 


sion,  N.  Y.  She  was  a  graduate  of  the 
Alfred  Academy,  N.  Y.,  and  taught 
school  in  that  state  and  at  Council 
Bluffs,  Iowa.  She  was  baptized  July 
17,  1854,  and  was  married  to  Israel 
Brown,  Api-il  13,  1856,  at  Council 
Bluffs;  with  him  she  came  to  Utah 
that  year  (1856),  and  after  their  ar- 
rival they  made  their  home  in  Ogden. 
In  1858  she  was  appointed  second 
counselor  in  the  Ogden  City  Relief 
Society,  and  a  year  later  became  pres- 
ident. Still  later,  she  acted  as  first 
counselor  to  Sister  Jane  S.  Richards, 
the  general  president  of  Relief  Society 
in  Weber  County,  and  helped  to  or- 
ganize relief  societies  in  Ogden  and 
other  parts  of  Weber  County.  She 
was  the  mother  of  three  children  and 
died  Dec.  27,  1907. 

BUNTING,  Harriet  D.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  10,  1892,  until  her  death 
at  Kanab,  Utah,  Jan.  27,  1893,  was 
born  Jan.  31,  1843,  at  Norfolk,  Eng- 
land, a  daughter  of  Robert  Dye  and 
Harriet  Coman.  She  came  to  Utah 
in  1853  with  her  parents  and  little 
sister  Elizabeth,  crossing  the  ocean 
in  the  ship  "Golconda,"  and  the  plains 
in  Capt.  Joseph  W.  Young's  Company. 
On  May  15,  1859,  she  married  James 
Lovett  Bunting,  and  in  1870  accom- 
panied her  husband  and  25  other  pio- 
neer families  to  settle  Kanab;  later 
her  husband  became  president  of  the 
Kanab  Stake,  and  Sister  Bunting  pre- 
sided over  the  Kanab  Stake  Relief  So- 
ciety Board  for  many  years.  She  also 
accompanied  her  husband  to  England 
on  a  mission  and  during  his  presiden- 
cy of  the  Liverpool  Conference  in  1878- 
1880,  she  organized  the  first  Relief  So- 
ciety and  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  British 
Mission.  Sister  Bunting  was  the 
mother  of  12  children. 

CAINE,  Margaret  A.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  5,  1902,  to  Oct.  1,  1907,  was 
born  Aug.  28,  1859,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,    a    daughter    of    Frederick    A. 


Mitchell  and  Margaret  Thompson.  She 
accompanied  her  parents  on  a  mis- 
sion to   Hawaii   in   1873.     On   March 

16,  1881,  she  married  Alfred  Caine  in 
Coalville,  Summit  Co.,  Utah.  She  was 
greatly  interested  in  sericulture,  be- 
ing a  member  of  the  territorial  organ- 
ization, and  at  the  World's  Fair  at 
Chicago  in  1893,  she  had  charge  of 
the  Utah  silk  exhibit  and  demonstrat- 
ed procedure  of  silk  manufacture.  She 
also  attended  the  International  Coun- 
cil of  Women  in  London  in  1899.  She 
served  as  auditor  of  Salt  Lake  County 
for  some  time  and  was  an  ordinance 
worker  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  for 
thirty  years.  Sister  Caine  was  the 
mother  of  four  children  and  died  Nov. 
6,  1929,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 

CANNON,  Annie  Wells,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  1902  to  1910,  and  from  1919  to 
the  present  time,  was  born  Dec.  7, 
1859,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Daniel  Hanmer  Wells  and 
Emmeline  B.  Woodward.  She  was 
educated  in  private  schools  and  grad- 
uated from  the  University  of  Des- 
eret  (class  of  1879).  She  was  mar- 
ried to   John   Quayle  Cannon,   March 

17,  1880,  and  became  the  mother  of 
twelve  children,  eleven  of  whom  are 
still    living     (1936).     She    spent    the 

years  1883-1884  in  the  Swiss  and 
German  Mission,  where  her  husband 
presided.  She  has  been  engaged  in 
Relief  Society  work  since  1874,  and 
was  president  of  the  Pioneer  Stake 
Relief  Society  for  16  years.  She  was 
assistant  editor  of  the  "Woman's  Ex- 
ponent" from  1895  to  1914,  was  co- 
author of  the  Relief  Society  Hand- 
book, has  contributed  largely  to  maga- 
zines, was  a  member  of  the  Utah  State 
Legislature  in  1913-1915,  and  has  been 
a  member  of  the  Salt  Lake  City  Li- 
brary Board  since  1918.  She  was  the 
first  president  of  the  War  Mothers  of 
Utah,  is  a  charter  member  of  the 
Daughters  of  Utah  Pioneers  and  Utah 
Red  Cross.  During  the  World  war 
she   served   as  assistant  chairman  of 


182 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


canteen  service  and  chairman  for  Utah 
of  the  European  relief  work  under 
Herbert  Hoover.  She  has  been  pre- 
sented with  a  medal  by  the  Salt  Lake 
Federation  of  Women's  Clubs  for  out- 
standing civic  service. 

CANNON,  Martha  A.  Brown,  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  from  1892  to  1907,  was 
born  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Francis  A.  Brown.  She  was  educated 
in  the  Ogden  public  schools  and  the 
University  of  Utah  and  taught  school 
in  Weber  County.  She  was  an  officer 
in  the  Young  Ladies'  Retrenchment 
Association  of  Weber  Stake.  She 
loved  children,  and  because  of  her 
philanthropic  work  in  their  behalf  the 
Martha  Society  of  Ogden,  an  organ- 
ization for  the  benefit  of  underprivi- 
leged children,  is  named  for  her.  Sis- 
ter Cannon  established  an  annual  Old 
Ladies'  Day,  when  she  entertained  with 
dinner  and  program  all  the  women 
over  70  in  Ogden.  She  was  a  delegate 
to  the  National  Council  of  Women 
and  traveled  extensively  in  the  inter- 
est of  the  Relief  Society.  In  April, 
1878,  she  was  married  to  Frank  J. 
Cannon  and  became  the  mother  of  four 
children. 

CANNON,    Sarah    Jane    Jenne,    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  from  April  5,  1898,  to 
April  2,  1921,  was  born  Sept.  11,  1839, 
in  Camden,  Upper  Canada,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Benjamin  Jenne  and  Sarah  Sny- 
der. She  was  the  first  donor  to  the 
Canadian  and  Hawaiian  temples  and 
spoke  at  the  dedication  of  the  Ha- 
waiian Temple,  the  first  woman  to  be 
accorded  such  privilege.  She  was  a 
temple  ordinance  worker  for  twenty 
years.  While  serving  on  the  General 
Board  of  Relief  Society  she  acted  as 
3rd  vice  president  from  April  4,  1899, 
to  Nov.  10,  1901,  when  that  office 
was  abolished.  On  April  11,  1858, 
she  was  married  to  George  Q.  Cannon 
and  became  the  mother  of  seven  chil 
dren.      Sister    Cannon    died    May    lo, 


1928.     (See   also   Biographical   Ency- 
clopedia, Vol.  2,  p.  605.) 

CARDON,  Lucy  Smith,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  10,  1892,  to  Oct.  5,  1902,  was 
born  Jan.  5,  1852,  at  Eaton  Bray,  Bed- 
fordshire, England,  a  daughter  of 
Thomas  X.  Smith  and  Margaret  Gour- 
ney.  The  family,  as  converts  to  the 
gospel,  arrived  in  Utah  in  1854.  Sister 
Cardon  was  prominent  in  all  of  the 
early  day  pioneer  activities  for  women, 
such  as  storing  grain,  etc.  She  served 
in  important  stake  positions  in  the 
Relief  Society  for  over  forty  years, 
including  that  of  president  of  the 
Cache  Stake  Relief  Society.  She  was 
the  wife  of  Thomas  Bartholomew  Car- 
don and  mother  of  eleven  children. 

CHILD,  Julia  Alleman,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  Relief  Society 
from  1921  to  1935,  and  second  coun- 
selor in  the  General  Presidency  and 
general  chairman  of  the  Program  of 
Education  from  1928  until  her  death, 
Jan.  23,  1935,  was  born  Sept.  8,  1873, 
at  Springville,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Benjamin  Alleman  and  Sariah  Jane 
Starr.  She  was  a  graduate  of  the 
B  r  i  g  h  a  m  Young  Academy,  took 
courses  at  the  U.  of  U.,  and  taught 
in  the  Springville  public  schools  four- 
teen years  as  teacher  and  principal, 
showing  outstanding  ability.  Always 
active  in  Church  affairs  she  was  also 
a  vice  regent  and  member  of  the 
Daughters  of  the  Revolution,  member 
of  Utah  Public  Health  Association, 
a  director  and  vice  president  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  Congress  of  Parent- 
Teacher  Association,  and  a  member 
of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Civici 
Center.  On  June  3,  1908,  she  was 
married  to  George  N.  Child  (later  su- 
perintendent of  schools)  and  mothered 
five  of  his  children  besides  being  the 
mother  of  three  herself. 

CHRISTENSEN,  Olive  Derbidge,  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  from  1911  to  1913.  (For 
biographical  sketch  see  page  80.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


183 


CLEVELAND,    Sarah    Marietta,    a 

charter  member  of  the  Relief  Society 
org'anized  by  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith,  March  17,  1842,  and  first  coun- 
selor to  Emma  Smith,  the  first  presi- 
dent of  the  Female  Relief  Society  in 
Nauvoo,  111.,  was  born  Oct.  20,  1788, 
at  Becket,  Burkshire  Co.,  Mass.,  a 
daughter  of  Ebenezer  Kingsley.  She 
was  the  wife  of  Judge  John  Cleveland 
of  Nauvoo,  who  was  never  converted 
to  "Mormonism."  Sister  Cleveland 
was  an  earnest  worker  in  the  Nauvoo 
Relief  Society  during  its  existence 
from  1842  to  1844;  but  when  the 
saints  were  expelled  from  Nauvoo  she 
remained  there  with  her  husband  and 
family. 

COWLES,  Elvira  A.  (later  Holmes), 

general  treasui-er  of  the  Relief  Society 
organized  by  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  at  Nauvoo,  111.,  March  17,  1842, 
was  born  Nov.  23,  1813,  at  Unadillo, 
N.  Y.,  a  daughter  of  Austin  Cowles 
and  Phebe  Wilbur.  She  was  sealed  to 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  lived 
in  his  home  to  assist  his  wife  Emma 
in  her  household  duties.  After  the 
martyrdom  of  the  Prophet,  she  was 
married  to  Jonathan  H.  Holmes,  a  for- 
mer body  guard  to  the  Prophet.  Her 
husband  joined  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
and  she  crossed  the  plains  in  Jedediah 
M.  Grant's  company  and  reached  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  in  September,  1847. 
She  remained  for  a  time  in  the  Old 
Fort,  where  she  taught  school,  and 
after  her  husband's  return  from  Cali- 
fornia they  made  their  home  in  Farm- 
ington,  where  she  again  taught  school, 
and  died  March  10,  1871.  She  was  the 
mother  of  five  children  and  also  reared 
her  husband's  motherless  daughter. 

CRISMON,     Elizabeth     Turner,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  from  May  25,  1911,  to 
April  2,  1921,  was  born  April  14, 
1849,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Joseph  Cain  and  Eliza- 
beth Whitaker.    From  her  youth  she 


has  been  an  active  member  of  the 
Church  as  a  Sunday  School  teacher 
and  Relief  Society  worker.  She  was 
a  charter  member  of  the  Utah  Kin- 
dergarten Association  and  of  the  Au- 
thors' Club  and  was  actively  interested 
in  the  Relief  Society  Home  for  Wom- 
en and  Girls.  In  June,  1871,  she  was 
married  to  Charles  Crismon,  jun.,  and 
is  the  mother  of  six  children.  She  has 
been  an  outstanding  business  woman, 
and  during  the  long  illness  of  her  late 
husband,  she  supervised,  most  suc- 
cessfully, the  business  affairs  of  the 
family  and  of  the  company  in  which 
they  were  financially  interested.  (See 
also  Biographical  Encyclopedia  Vol. 
2,  p.  612.) 

DAVIS,  Edna  May,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  May  25,  1911,  until  her  death, 
Nov.  14,  1919,  was  born  Feb.  15,  1871, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Albert  W.  Davis  and  Melissa  Jane 
Lambson.  She  held  various  offices  in 
the  Center  Ward  in  Salt  Lake  City,  of 
which  her  father  was  Bishop  for  many 
years.  Sister  Davis  was  a  member 
of  the  Temple  Choir,  and  an  ordinance 
worker  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  for 
seventeen  years. 

DUSENBERRY,  Ida  Smoot,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  from  1901  to  1921,  and  a  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  that  organ- 
ization from  1901  to  1910,  was  born 
May  5,  1873,  at  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Abraham  0.  Smoot  and 
Anna  Kirstine  Mouritsen.  She  is  a 
graduate  of  the  Brigham  Young  Uni- 
versity, and  of  the  Chauncey  Hall  Col- 
lege of  Boston,  and  also  did  graduate 
work  for  three  years  at  the  Columbia 
University.  She  was  principal  of  the 
Kindergarten  Normal  Training  School 
at  the  B.  Y.  U.  from  1910  to  1921,  and 
has  been  assistant  professor  of  psy- 
chology at  the  B.  Y.  U.  since  1921. 
She  was  professor  of  psychology  of 
the  Floating  University  on  a  trip 
around  the  world  in  1931.    Sister  Du- 


184 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


senberry  served  three  terms  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Utah  State  Kindergarten 
Association  and  as  a  delegate  to  the 
National  Kindergarten  Convention  in 
1906.  She  was  a  delegate  to  the  Na- 
tional Council  of  Women  at  Washing- 
ton, D.  C,  in  1902,  delegate  to  the  In- 
ternational Council  of  Women  at  Ber- 
lin, Germany,  in  1905,  and  delegate  at 
Toronto,  Canada,  in  1910,  and  was  a 
U.  S.  delegate  to  that  council  when 
held  at  Christiania,  Norway,  in  1920. 
She  also  represented  the  L.  D.  S.  Relief 
Society  at  one  national  and  three  in- 
ternational conventions  of  the  Council 
of  Women.  While  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Relief  Society,  Sister 
Dusenberry  instituted  the  first  general 
movement  in  regard  to  uniform  class 
work  in  the  Relief  Society  by  the  es- 
tablishment of  Mothers'  Classes  in 
1902.  In  1891  she  was  married  to 
George  A.  Dusenberry  and  is  the 
mother  of  two  children.  (See  also 
Biographical  Encyclopedia  Vol.  2, 
p.  619.) 

EDDINGTON,  Sarah,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  March  26,  1914,  to  April  2,  1921, 
was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
June  13,  1861,  a  daughter  of  William 
Eddington  and  Sarah  J.  Fry.  She  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools  of  Salt 
Lake  City  and  the  University  of  Utah. 
She  was  a  teacher  in  the  Sunday 
School  of  the  7th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  presided  over  the  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  there  for  eight  years,  after 
which  she  was  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  from  1889 
to  1914,  when  she  was  called  to  serve 
on  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society. 

EMPEY,  Emma  Adams,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
since  May  25,  1911,  was  born  Aug.  5, 
1860,  at  Tipton,  Staffordshire,  Eng- 
land, a  daughter  of  John  Adams  and 
Sarah  Tranter.  She  came  to  Utah  in 
September,  1881,  as  a  non-member  of 
the  Church.  She  went  back  to  Eng- 
land on  a  visit,  but  returned  to  Utah 


in  June,  1887,  to  make  her  permanent 
home  there.  She  was  baptized  Sept. 
27,  1890,  by  Bishop  Nelson  A.  Empey, 
and  having  received  a  good  education 
in  England  was  soon  actively  engaged 
in  Church  work.  On  June  24,  1891, 
she  was  married  to  Bishop  Empey. 
From  1911  to  1921  she  served  as  gen- 
ei-al  treasurer  of  the  Relief  Society, 
as  manager  of  the  Burial  Clothes  De- 
partment for  a  time,  and  from  1900 
to  1920  as  superintendent  of  the  Relief 
Society  nurses.  Since  1920  she  has 
conducted  a  nurses'  register. 

EVANS,  Amy  Jane  Whipple,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  since  April,  1921,  was  born 
Dec.  15,  1873,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Nelson  W.  Whipple  and 
Susan  Ann  Gay.  She  was  educated 
in  the  Salt  Lake  City  public  schools 
and  graduated  from  the  Normal 
School,  University  of  Utah,  in  1892. 
She  has  taken  courses  in  sociology  at 
the  University  of  Utah,  the  Brigham 
Young  University  and  University  of 
California  and  taught  in  the  public 
schools  of  Salt  Lake  City  for  seven 
years.  Sister  Evans  was  a  member 
of  the  Relief  Society  Board  of  the 
Granite  Stake  previous  to  being  called 
to  serve  on  the  General  Relief  Society 
Board  in  which  organization,  at  pres- 
ent she  is  supervisor  of  the  Social 
Service  Department.  Mrs.  Evans  is 
an  artist  and  a  literary  woman.  On 
Jan.  15,  1900,  she  was  married  to  John 
Henry  Evans,  a  prominent  educator 
and  she  is  the  mother  of  four  children. 

FARNSWORTH,  Julia  Permelia 
Murdock,  a  member  of  the  General 
Board  of  Relief  Society  from  April  4, 
1899,  to  April  2,  1921,  was  born  Dec. 
23,  1852,  at  Lehi,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
John  R.  Murdock  and  Almira  H.  Lott. 
She  attended  the  district  schools  until 
nearly  18  years  of  age  and  then  taught 
a  free  school  for  two  years.  She  was 
president  of  the  Retrenchment  Asso- 
ciation of  Beaver,  Utah,  holding  this 
office    until   after   it   was    called    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


185 


Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  She  was  a  member  of 
a  Relief  Society  at  Beaver  at  the  age 
of  15  and  traveled  thousands  of  miles 
in  connection  with  her  labors  in  that 
organization.  She  was  promoter  and 
president  of  the  second  suflFi'age  so- 
ciety in  Utah,  a  charter  member  and 
State  Historian  of  the  Daughters  of 
the  Revolution,  also  the  first  corres- 
ponding secretary  of  the  Daughters  of 
Utah  Pioneers,  of  which  society  she 
was  a  charter  member  and  helped  to 
organize,  and  also  was  historian  of 
the  Daughters  of  the  Mormon  Battal- 
ion. She  was  married  to  Philo  Taylor 
Farnsworth  in  1874  and  is  the  mother 
of  ten  children.  (See  also  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.   2,   p.   621.) 

GATES,  Susa  Young,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  1911  to  1922,  was  born  March 
18,  1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Brigham  Young  and  Lucy 
Bigelow.  She  was  educated  in  her 
father's  private  school,  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Deseret,  the  Brigham  Young 
University  and  at  the  Harvard  Uni- 
versity. She  was  a  woman  of  great 
activity  of  mind  and  body  and  wrote 
extensively  for  local  publications  from 
her  youth  to  advanced  age.  Two  years 
previous  to  her  death  she  published  a 
very  valuable  book,  "The  Life  Story  of 
Brigham  Young";  this  was  only  one 
of  several  books  published  by  her, 
which  included  the  "History  of  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A."  She  was  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1899  to  1911  and  founded  the 
"Young  Woman's  Journal,"  the  offi- 
cial organ  of  that  society,  of  which 
she  was  the  editor  for  11  years.  Sister 
Gates  also  served  as  corresponding 
secretary  and  historian  of  the  General 
Board  of  Relief  Society  and  was  editor 
of  the  "Relief  Society  Magazine"  fi'orn 
1914  to  1922.  She  represented  the 
Relief  Society  and  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
at  the  National  and  International 
Councils  of  Women  on  several  occa- 
sions and  was  Chairman  of  the  Press 
Committee  of  the  National  Council  of 


Women  for  five  years.  She  was  an 
ordinance  worker  in  the  Temples  at 
St.  George  and  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
author  of  text  books  on  genealogy. 
Sister  Gates  was  assistant  organist  of 
the  Utah  Society  of  the  Daughters  of 
the  Revolution  and  organized  Music 
and  Domestic  Science  departments  at 
the  Brigham  Young  University,  of 
which  institution  she  was  a  trustee 
for  forty  years.  She  was  also  a  trustee 
of  the  Utah  Agricultural  College,  acted 
as  president  of  the  Daughters  of  the 
Utah  Pioneers  and  founded  a  Hall  of 
Relics,  the  nucleus  of  the  exhibit  now 
displayed  in  the  State  Capitol.  In 
18S0  she  was  married  to  Jacob  F. 
Gates  and  was  the  mother  of  13  chil- 
dren. Sister  Gates  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City  May  27,  1933.  (See  also  Bio- 
graphical Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p.  626.) 

GRANT,  Susan,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Relief  Society  from 
Oct.  10,  1892,  to  her  death  March  11, 
1914,  was  born  July  25,  1832,  at  Shel- 
don, N.  Y.,  a  daughter  of  Charles  Fair- 
child  and  Eunice  Noble.  She  was 
acquainted  with  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  in  Nau- 
voo,  111.,  and  when  eleven  years  of 
age,  in  times  of  danger,  was  entrusted 
with  secret  messages  between  the 
Prophet  and  his  brother  Hyrum  Smith. 
She  was  a  Utah  pioneer  of  1847  and  on 
Nov.  0,  1848,  was  married  to  Jedediah 
M.  Grant  and  became  the  mother  of 
three  children.  She  also  reared  two 
other  children.  After  the  death  of 
her  husband,  Dec.  1,  1856,  she  made 
her  home  in  West  Bountiful,  where 
she  presided  over  the  Relief  Society 
from  1878  to  1885,  and  was  president 
of  the  Davis  Stake  Relief  Society  from 
1886  to  1892. 

GREENWOOD,  Hazel  Hill,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  since  Dec.  11,  1929,  was  born 
Nov.  16,  1886,  at  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  William  H. 
Hill  and  Elizabeth  Ann  Hamilton. 
She  has  been  active  in  Church  work 


186 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


all  her  life,  was  a  teacher  in  Sunday 
School  and  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  president  of 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  Le  Grand  Ward  in 
1917-1918  and  also  secretary  for  the 
Relief  Society  in  that  ward.  She  serv- 
ed as  secretary  and  counselor  and, 
from  1924  to  1929,  as  president  of  the 
Liberty  Stake  Relief  Society.  She 
has  presided  over  the  Parent-Teacher 
Association  of  the  Emerson  School 
and  is  at  present  president  of  the 
Woman's  Legislative  Council  of  Utah 
and  has  been  a  member  of  the  Gover- 
nor's Investigating  Committee  of  Gov- 
ernmental Units  since  1935.  On  June 
23,  1910,  she  was  married  to  Jacob 
Jensen,  who  died  in  September,  1912. 
One  son  was  born  of  this  marriage. 
On  April  15,  1921,  she  was  married  to 
Judge  Joshua  Greenwood. 

HARDY,  Annie  Kay,  a  member  of 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society, 
was  born  Feb.  1,  1855,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  John  M. 
Kay  and  Ellen  Pardington.  She  was 
among  the  first  to  graduate  from  the 
University  of  Deseret,  and  was  a 
woman  of  great  intelligence,  had  a 
kindergarten  school  at  her  home  when 
only  12  years  old,  and  when  quite 
young  taught  school  in  the  old  12th 
Ward.  She  was  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  Primary  from  1896  to 
1899,  secretary  of  the  Ensign  Stake 
Relief  Society  from  1904  to  1912,  and 
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  Relief  Society  in  1909. 
She  was  also  a  member  of  the  board  of 
trustees  of  the  Agricultural  College  of 
Utah  and  of  the  Reapers'  Club  of  Salt 
Lake  City.  Sister  Hardy  was  secre- 
tary and  treasurer  of  the  Utah  Com- 
mission for  the  adult  blind  and  an 
active  worker  in  that  organization. 
As  a  young  woman  she  was  married 
to  Rufus  H.  Hardy  and  became  the 
mother  of  three  sons. 

HARKER,  Harriet  Bennion,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  from  Oct.  1,  1907,  to  Oct.  3, 
1910,  was  born  at  Taylorsville,  Utah, 


Dec.  18,  1857,  a  daughter  of  John  Ben- 
nion and  Esther  Wainwright.  She  was 
active  in  the  organizations  of  the 
Church  from  her  earliest  youth  and 
presided  over  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Re- 
lief Society  from  1908  to  1917,  She 
was  also  a  prominent  member  of  the 
Authors'  Club  and  Friendship  Circle 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  In  her  youth  she 
was  married  to  Benjamin  Harker  and 
was  the  mother  of  four  children.  She 
died  at  Santa  Monica,  California, 
June  25,  1923. 

HART,  Lalene  Hendricks,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
since  April  2,  1921,  was  born  Aug.  24, 
1885,  in  Lewiston,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Brigham  A.  Hendricks 
and  Mary  R.  Stoddard.  She  graduated 
from  the  Brigham  Young  College  at 
Logan  and  also  studied  at  the  Sim- 
mons College,  Boston,  Mass.  She  be- 
came a  teacher  of  home  economics  in 
high  schools  in  Utah  and  Idaho  and 
was  head  of  the  Home  Economics  Dept. 
of  the  Brigham  Young  College  for 
some  time.  She  has  also  served  as 
an  officer  and  teacher  in  all  the  auxil- 
iary organizations  of  her  ward,  was 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 
Benson  Stake,  a  member  of  the  Cache 
Stake  Religion  Class  Board,  and  sec- 
retary, and  later  a  counselor  in  the 
Relief  Society  of  the  Richards  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City.  On  June  23,  1915,  she 
was  married  to  Pres.  Charles  H.  Hart 
of  the  First  Council  of  Seventy  and 
became  the  mother  of  one  daughter. 
She  presided  over  the  L.  D,  S.  Relief 
Society  in  Canada,  while  her  husband 
presided  over  the  Canadian  Mission. 
Sister  Hart  was  also  regent  of  the 
Daughters  of  the  Mormon  Battalion 
two  terms. 

HORNE,  Alice  Merrill,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  1902  to  1916,  was  born  Jan.  2, 
1868,  at  Fillmore,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Clarence  Merrill  and  Bathsheba 
Smith.  She  graduated  from  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  and  studied  art  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


187 


visited  art  galleries  in  Europe  and 
America.  She  was  a  member  of  the 
Third  Legislature  of  the  State  of  Utah 
and  introduced  the  University  Free 
Scholarships  Bill,  was  the  author  of 
a  bill  which  created  Utah  Art  Institute 
and  conducted  hundreds  of  city  and 
urban  exhibitions  of  fine  arts.  Sister 
Home  has  been  a  delegate  to  several 
national  and  international  councils  of 
women  at  home  and  abroad.  She  is  a 
charter  member  and  was  the  first  sec- 
retary and  second  president  of  the 
Daughters  of  Utah  Pioneers,  State 
Regent  of  the  Daughters  of  the  Revo- 
lution, and  is  a  charter  member  of  the 
Academy  of  Western  Culture.  Recent- 
ly she  was  awarded  a  medal  for  dis- 
tinguished civic  service  by  the  Salt 
Lake  Federation  of  Women's  Clubs. 
In  1890  she  was  married  to  George 
Henry  Home  and  is  the  mother  of  six 
children. 

HORNE,  Mary  Isabella,  a  member 
of  the  Relief  Society  in  Nauvoo,  HI., 
and  an  officer  of  the  General  Board  of 
Relief  Society  in  Utah,  was  born  Nov. 
20,  1818,  at  Rainham,  Kent,  England, 
a  daughter  of  Stephen  Hales  and  Mary 
Ann  Hales  (maiden  name  of  mother 
the  same.)  As  a  girl  fourteen  years  of 
age,  Mary  Isabella  came  to  America 
with  her  parents.  On  May  9,  1836, 
she  was  married  to  Joseph  Home  and 
two  months  later  the  young  couple 
were  baptized  members  of  the  Church. 
They  were  associated  with  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  at  Far  West,  Mo.,  and  at 
Nauvoo,  111.  With  other  exiles  from 
Nauvoo  they  left  their  home  in  Febru- 
ary, 1846,  en  route  for  the  Missouri 
River,  and  at  Mt.  Pisgah,  Iowa,  a  little 
daughter  was  born.  They  spent  the 
winter  of  1846-47  at  Winter  Quarters 
and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  Oct. 
6,  1847,  as  members  of  Edward  Hun- 
ter's hundred,  of  which  Joseph  Home 
was  a  captain  of  fifty.  Sister  Home 
presided  over  the  Relief  Society  of  the 
14th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  for  14 
years,  and  was  pi'esident  of  the  Salt 
J;ake  Stake  Relief  Society  for  a  long- 


time. On  July  1,  1880,  she  was  ap- 
pointed treasurer  of  the  Central  Board 
of  Relief  Society,  and  when  that  board, 
more  fully  organized,  became  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  Relief  Society  in  1892, 
she  was  continued  as  treasurer,  which 
position  she  held  until  1901,  but  was 
continued  as  a  member  of  the  board 
until  her  death,  which  occurred  Aug. 
27,  1906.  Sister  Home  was  called  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  preside  over 
the  meetings  of  the  Retrenchment  As- 
sociation (later  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.)  of 
the  14th  Ward  and  assisted  in  organiz- 
ing other  associations.  She  was  a 
member  of  the  Deseret  Hospital  Com- 
mittee for  12  years  and  established  a 
Relief  Society  Nurse  School  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake.  She  was  a  counse- 
lor to  Sister  Zina  D.  H.  Young  in  the 
Utah  Silk  Association  and  did  much  to 
foster  that  industry.  Sister  Horne  was 
the  mother  of  fifteen  children.  (See 
also  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
1,  p.  807.) 

HOWARD,  Elizabeth,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  10,  1892,  until  her  death 
Mar.  12,  1893,  was  bom  July  12,  1823, 
at  Carlow,  Carlow  Co.,  Ireland,  a 
daughter  of  Robert  Anderson  and  Lu- 
cretia  Ward.  She  first  heard  the  gos- 
pel in  1851  and  came  to  Utah  in  Sep- 
tember, 1853.  She  was  married  to 
William  Howard  June  9,  1841,  and 
located  in  Big  Cottonwood,  where  she 
became  secretary  of  the  Relief  Society 
in  1867.  She  served  as  counselor  to 
Sister  Mary  Isabella  Horne  in  the 
General  Retrenchment  Association  and 
was  the  first  secretary  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  Relief  Society,  organized  in  De- 
cember, 1877.  In  1868  she  accom- 
panied her  husband  on  a  mission  to 
England,  where  she  was  a  great  asset 
to  him  in  his  missionary  labors.  She 
was  the  mother  of  ten  children. 

HOWELLS,    Marcia    Knowlton,    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  since  Feb.  20,  1929,  was  born 
May  28,  1888,  at  Farmington,  Utah,  a 


188 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


daughter  of  Benjamin  F.  Knowlton 
and  Minerva  E.  Richards.  She  was 
educated  in  the  Farming-ton  public 
schools,  the  L.  D.  S.  University  and 
graduated  from  the  University  of  Utah 
Normal  School,  after  which  she  taught 
school  four  years.  She  was  a  member 
of  the  presidency  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  Relief  Society  and  has  worked 
and  held  office  in  all  the  women's 
auxiliaries  of  the  Church.  On  Oct.  3, 
1910,  she  was  married  to  Dr.  Thomas 
Joel  Howells,  and  in  1921  took  a  trip 
around  the  world  with  him  for  research 
work  and  study.  She  is  the  mother  of 
one  son.  Sister  Howells  was  also  a 
member  and  worked  energetically  in 
the  Red  Cross  during  the  World  war. 

HYDE,  Annie  Ta)ior,  first  counselor 
in  the  general  presidency  of  the  Rel'ef 
Society,  was  born  Oct.  20,  1849,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Pres.  John  Taylor  and  Jane  Ballan- 
tyne.  She  was  educated  by  private 
instructors  and  at  the  University  of 
Deseret  and  was  a  teacher  in  her  fa- 
ther's family  school  for  five  years.  She 
was  a  Sunday  School  teacher  in  the 
14th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  for  six 
years,  a  member  of  the  pi-esidency  of 
17th  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.;  first  counse- 
lor in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Relief  So- 
ciety from  1895  until  called  to  serve 
on  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
in  1900,  in  which  capacity  she  was 
active  until  her  death  March  12,  1909. 
She  was  a  regular  Temple  ordinance 
worker  and  was  among  the  first  called 
by  the  Presidency  of  the  Church  to 
work  as  a  missionary  on  the  Temple 
Block.  She  has  the  title  of  "Founder 
General  of  the  Daughters  of  the  Utah 
Pioneers"  and  was  the  first  president 
of  that  organization.  On  Dec.  15,  1870, 
she  was  married  to  Alonzo  E.  Hyde, 
son  of  Apostle  Orson  Hyde,  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  eight  chihhen. 
(See  also  Biographical  Encyclopedia, 
Vol.  1,  p.  702.) 

HYDE,  Jeanette  A.,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Relief  Society  from 


1913  to  1929,  was  born  Dec.  12,  1865, 
at  Spring  City,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Abraham  Acord  and 
Nancy  Frost.  She  graduated  from 
the  Brigham  Young  University  and 
taught  school  two  years.  She  was 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  of  the 
22nd  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  for  15 
years  and  of  the  33rd  Ward  Y.  L.  M. 
L  A.  four  years.  She  was  a  member 
of  the  Liberty  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  L  A. 
Board,  during  which  time  she  estab- 
lished a  summer  vacation  camp  for 
girls.  While  a  member  of  the  General 
Board  of  Relief  Society  she  was  busi- 
ness manager  of  the  "Relief  Society 
Bulletin"  and  of  the  "Relief  Society 
Magazine"  from  1914  to  1929.  Sister 
Hyde  was  one  of  the  three  founders 
of  the  Women's  Civic  Center,  member 
of  the  Board  of  Regents  of  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah  and  was  Collector  of 
Customs  at  the  Port  of  Hawaii  from 
1925  to  1929.  On  July  20,  1885,  she 
was  married  to  Joseph  Smith  Hyde, 
a  son  of  Apostle  Orson  Hyde,  and 
became  the  mother  of  seven  children. 
Sister  Hyde  died  in  Honolulu,  Hawaii, 
August  15,  1936.  Her  remains  were 
brought  to  Salt  Lake  City  for  inter- 
ment, which  took  place  Aug.  28th, 
1936.  (See  also  Biographical  Encyclo- 
pedia, Vol.  2,  p.  644.) 

IRVINE,  Rosannah  Cannon,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  since  April  2,  1921,  was  born 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  June  29, 
1872,  a  daughter  of  George  Q.  Cannon 
and  Sarah  Jane  Jenne.  She  had  pri- 
vate tutors  until  the  L.  D.  S.  Univer- 
sity opened  in  the  Social  Hall  in  1886 
with  James  E.  Talmage  as  president. 
She  graduated  from  this  institution 
and  also  from  Maud  May  Babcock's 
private  school  of  Dramatic  Art.  After 
doing  post-graduate  work  in  Boston 
and  New  York,  she  taught  English 
and  Dramatic  Art  in  the  Utah  Agri- 
cultural College.  She  has  traveled  ex- 
tensively in  the  United  States  and 
Europe,  has  worked  in  all  the  women's 
auxiliaries  of  the  Church  and  became 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


189 


secretary  of  the  Farmers  Ward  Re- 
lief Society  at  fifteen  years  of  age. 
She  was  also  a  member  of  the  Ensign 
Stake  Relief  Society  Board,  her  work 
being  in  the  literary  department.  On 
June  29,  1892,  she  married  Alonzo 
Blair  Irvine  and  is  the  mother  of  two 
children. 

JAMES,  Minnie  Home,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  1,  1907,  to  Oct.  3,  1910,  was 
born  Dec.  9,  1855,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  Joseph  Home 
and  Mary  Isabella  Hales.  Both  her 
parents  were  Utah  pioneers  of  1847. 
She  was  secretary  of  the  Sunday 
School  and  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  14th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  president 
of  the  Primary  Association  of  the  7th 
Ward.  She  was  the  first  corresponding 
secretary  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  Board,  which  position  she 
held  until  the  Stake  was  divided  in 
1904,  when  she  was  chosen  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  Ensign  Stake  Relief  So- 
ciety, from  which  position  she  was 
released  to  become  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Relief  Society  in 
1907.  She  served  in  that  position  until 
1910,  when  she  was  released  to  become 
a  counselor  in  the  Liberty  Stake  Relief 
Society.  Sister  Home  was  the  first 
treasurer  of  the  Daughters  of  Utah 
Pioneers  and  later  president  of  the 
county  division  of  that  organization. 
On  Jan.  21,  1880,  she  was  married  to 
David  Wm.  James  and  became  the 
mother  of  seven  children. 

JENNINGS,  Priscilla  Paul,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  from  Oct.  5,  1902,  until  her 
death  Jan.  2,  1918,  was  born  March 
25,  1838,  at  Truro,  Cornwall,  England, 
a  daughter  of  William  Paul  and  Eliza- 
beth Goyne.  She  was  baptized  in  1849 
and  came  to  Utah  in  1854.  The  follow- 
ing year  she  was  married  to  William 
Jennings  and  accompanied  her  hus- 
band on  his  mission  to  Carson  Valley, 
thus  being  a  pioneer  in  Nevada.  She 
was  a  Relief  Society  worker  from  the 


early  days  and  by  organizing  a  sew- 
ing club,  helped  many  who  were  in 
destitute  circumstances.  Sister  Jen- 
nings was  chairman  of  the  Women's 
Committee  appointed  to  supervise  the 
furnishing  of  rooms  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  and  was  one  of  the  first  women 
called  to  officiate  as  an  ordinance 
worker.  She  organized  the  Unity 
Club,  that,  under  her  supervision, 
raised  $2,000  for  the  old  Deseret  Hos- 
pital in  1882.  Sister  Jennings  was  the 
mother  of  fourteen  children.  (See  also 
Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p. 
505.) 

KESLER,  Donnette  Smith,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  from  April  11,  1918,  to  April 
2,  1921,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Sept.  17,  1872,  a  daughter  of  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Julina  Lambson. 
She  graduated  from  the  normal  course 
in  the  L.  D.  S.  College  in  1892  and 
from  the  Pratt  Institute  Kindergarten 
Training  School  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in 
1898.  She  acted  as  lady  superintend- 
ent of  the  L.  D.  S.  College  in  1894- 
1896,  and  was  a  worker  in  the  Social 
Service  (Red  Cross)  in  1919.  In  her 
girlhood  she  presided  over  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  of  the  Salt  Lake  City  16th 
Ward  and  was  a  member  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  Board  until 
the  division  of  the  Stake  in  1904. 
She  was  a  member  of  the  Ensign 
Stake  Sunday  School  Board  from  1924 
to  1928  and  of  the  Ensign  Stake  Gen- 
ealogical Board  from  1928  to  1936. 
Sister  Kesler  was  president  of  the 
Utah  State  Kindergarten  Association 
in  1902-1903  and  vice-president  of  the 
Daughters  of  Utah  Pioneers  in  1922. 
She  has  labored  as  an  ordinance  work- 
er in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  from  1893 
to  1894  and  from  1921  to  the  present 
time.  On  Dec.  26,  1900,  she  was  mar- 
ried to  Alonzo  Pratt  Kesler  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  six  children. 

KIMBALL,  Mary  Connelly,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  since   March   12,   1930,  editor 


190 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


of  the  Relief  Society  Magazine,  etc., 
was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  Feb. 
19,  1876,  a  daughter  of  John  Connelly 
and  Elizabeth  Jessop.  She  graduated 
from  the  University  of  Utah  (normal 
course)  in  1894  and  received  the  de- 
gree of  Bachelor  of  Arts  from  that 
institution  in  1898.  From  1924  to 
1926  she  did  post-graduate  work,  and 
taught  in  the  public  schools  of  Salt 
Lake  City  for  nine  years.  She  acted 
as  president  of  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  in  the 
21st  and  27th  wards  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
was  a  member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Y.  L.  M,  L  A.  Board  and  of  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  She 
was  editor  of  the  "Young  Woman's 
Journal"  16  years,  being  released  June 
5,  1923  because  of  her  marriage  to 
Andrew  Kimball,  president  of  the  St. 
Joseph  Stake  in  Arizona.  Pres.  Kim- 
ball died  Aug.  31,  1924,  and  since 
September,  1930,  Sister  Kimball  ha.s 
been  editor  of  the  "Relief  Society 
Magazine."  She  was  also  one  of  the 
first  group  of  missionaries  called  to 
work  on  the  Temple  Block. 

KIMBALL,  Sarah  Melissa  Granger, 

a  member  of  the  Relief  Society  or- 
ganized by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
in  Nauvoo,  111.,  March  17,  1842,  was 
born  Dec.  29,  1818,  at  Phelps,  Ontario 
Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  daughter  of  Oliver  Grang- 
er and  Lydia  Dibble.  She  was  closely 
associated  with  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  and  his  family,  and  was  active 
in  assisting  the  saints  at  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  and  at  Nauvoo,  111.  The  prelimi- 
nary meeting,  previous  to  the  organi- 
zation of  the  Nauvoo  Relief  Society, 
was  held  in  her  home.  She  came  to 
Utah  in  1852  and  settled  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  on  Feb.  9,  1857  she  was 
chosen  president  of  the  Relief  Society 
then  organized  in  the  15th  Ward.  In 
1866  she  had  the  honor  of  laying  the 
corner  stone  of  the  first  Relief  Society 
building  in  this  dispensation,  in  the 
14th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  Sister 
Kimball  became  seci'etary  of  the  Cen- 
tral Board  of  Relief  Society  July  1, 
1880  and  was  appointed  third  counse- 


lor in  the  presidency  of  that  organi- 
zation Oct.  10,  1892,  which  position 
she  held  until  her  death  Dec.  1,  1898. 
Sister  Kimball  was  the  first  president 
of  the  Utah  Suffrage  Association  and 
an  Honorary  vice-president  of  the 
National  American  Suffrage  Associa- 
tion and  was  also  a  delegate  to  the 
Utah  Constitutional  Convention  in 
1882.  She  was  married  to  Hiram  S. 
Kimball  when  she  lived  at  Nauvoo, 
and  became  the  mother  of  three  sons; 
she  also  adopted  one  boy.  (See  also 
Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p. 
372.) 

KNIGHT,  Lucy  Jane  (Jennie)  Brim- 
hall,  a  member  of  the  General  Board 
of  Relief  Society  since  April  2,  1921, 
and  first  counselor  in  the  General 
Presidency  from  1921  to  1928,  was 
born  Dec.  13,  1875,  at  Spanish  Fork, 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  George  Henry 
Brimhall  and  Alsina  Elizabeth  Wil- 
kins.  She  graduated  from  the  B.  Y. 
U.  in  1895  and  taught  in  the  public 
schools  of  the  San  Juan  County  and 
later  in  the  B.  Y.  U.  Training  School. 
She  was  one  of  the  first  two  regularly 
called  women  missionaries  in  the 
Church  and  filled  a  mission  to  England 
in  1898-1899.  On  Jan.  18,  1899,  she 
was  married  to  Jesse  William  Knight 
and  soon  afterwards,  with  her  hus- 
band, went  to  Canada,  where  they 
were  among  the  founders  and 
pioneers  of  Raymond,  Alberta,  Bro. 
Knight  being  engaged  in  establishing 
industries  among  the  saints  there. 
While  in  Canada  Sister  Knight  pre- 
sided over  the  Taylor  Stake  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  for  five  years  and  later  presided 
over  the  Utah  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  for 
eight  years.  She  also  served  as  ma- 
tron of  the  B.  Y.  U.  for  three  years. 
During  the  war  she  was  chosen  second 
vice-president  of  the  Women's  Coun- 
cil of  Defense  of  Utah  and  was  a  dele- 
gate from  Utah  to  the  United  States 
Council  of  Defense  held  in  Washington, 
D.  C.  In  May,  1925,  she  attended  the 
International  Council  of  Women  at 
Washington,  D.  C,  and  since  1930  she 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


191 


has  been  vice-chairman  of  the  Utah 
County  Red  Cross.  Sister  Knight  is 
the  mother  of  two  sons. 

LITTLE,  Rebecca  Ellen,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  5,  1904,  to  Sept.  1,  1905, 
was  born  Aug.  12,  1852,  on  the  Church 
farm  in  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Llewllyn  Mantle  and  Catherine 
Watkins.  She  was  very  ambitious  for 
education  and  struggled  unceasingly 
to  obtain  it.  She  graduated  from  the 
Normal  School  under  Dr.  John  R. 
Park,  taught  school  in  the  13th  Ward, 
and  graduated  from  the  University  of 
Utah  with  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of 
Science.  She  was  the  founder  of  the 
Authors'  Club  in  Salt  Lake  City  and 
spoke  in  Chicago,  111.,  at  a  convention 
of  the  National  Council  of  Women. 
She  was  a  member  of  the  Board  of 
Regents  of  the  University  of  Utah  ten 
years.  For  some  time  she  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Ensign  Stake  Relief  So- 
ciety Board  previous  to  being  called 
to  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society. 
After  her  husband's  death,  she  studied 
music  and  art.  In  history  she  ranks 
as  one  of  the  best  educated  women  of 
Utah.  She  was  married  to  Feramorz 
Little  in  July,  1882,  and  became  the 
mother  of  two  children.  She  died  May 
29,  1909.  (See  also  Biographical  En- 
cyclopedia, Vol.  2,  p.  487.) 

LUND,  Julia  A.  F.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
since  April  4,  1921,  and  general  secre- 
tary-treasurer of  that  organization 
since  1928,  was  born  Dec.  2,  1874,  at 
Beaver  City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Philo  Taylor  Farnsworth  and  Julia 
P.  Murdock.  She  was  educated  in 
the  public  schools  at  Beaver,  at  the 
Beaver  Stake  Academy,  and  the  B.  Y. 
U.  and  the  University  of  Utah.  She 
graduated  from  the  last  named  insti- 
tution with  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of 
Arts  and  also  took  post-graduate  work 
at  the  University  of  California.  In 
1893  she  represented  the  young  women 
of  Utah  at  the  International  Congress 


of  Women  held  in  connection  with  the 
World's  Fair  at  Chicago.  At  a  meet- 
ing of  the  General  Federation  of 
Women's  Clubs  held  in  Denver,  Colo- 
I'ado,  in  1898,  she  was  made  state 
chairman  of  correspondence  for  Utah, 
and  as  a  charter  member  of  the 
Daughters  of  the  Revolution  she  repre- 
sented that  Society  in  Philadelphia  in 

1899.  She  has  also  served  as  vice- 
president  of  the  U.  of  U.  Alumni  As- 
sociation. Sister  Lund  was  an  instruc- 
tor in  Theology  and  English  at  the 
L.  D.  S.  U.  and  served  three  years 
as  director  of  educational  work  at  the 
Salt  Lake  Civic  Center.     On  Sept.  20, 

1900,  she  was  married  to -Henry  C. 
Lund  and  is  the  mother  of  seven  chil- 
dren. 

LYMAN,  Amy  Brown,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
since  Oct.  5,  1909,  and  now  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  that  organi- 
zation, was  born  Feb.  7,  1872,  at  Pleas- 
ant Grove,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  John 
Brown  and  Margaret  Zimmerman.  She 
graduated  from  the  B.  Y.  U.  Normal 
School  in  1890  and  did  additional  work 
at  the  universities  of  Utah,  Chicago 
and  Cornell.  She  was  a  teacher  and 
teacher  training  supervisor  in  the 
B.  Y.  U.  and  a  teacher  in  the  Salt 
Lake  City  public  schools.  She  served 
as  a  ward  officer  in  Primary  and  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  work  and  after  being  called 
to  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
was  in  succession  assistant  secretary, 
general  secretary,  assistant  business 
manager  of  the  "Relief  Society  Maga- 
zine," acting  editor  of  said  magazine 
and  director  of  the  Welfare  depart- 
ment. On  Oct.  7,  1928,  she  was  sus- 
tained as  first  counselor  to  Pres. 
Louise  Y.  Robison.  Sister  Lyman 
served  as  auditor,  recording  secretary 
and  vice-president  of  the  National 
Council  of  Women,  as  a  delegate  to 
national  and  international  councils  of 
women,  as  delegate  to  the  Internation- 
al Congress  of  Women  at  the  World's 
Fair  in  San  Francisco,  Calif.,  in  1915, 
and  at  the  Century  of  Progress  Fair 


192 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


in  Chicago  in  1933.  She  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  House  of  Representatives 
of  the  Utah  State  Legislature  in  1923, 
and  was  appointed  chairman  of  public 
health  and  president  of  the  Utah  State 
Conference  on  Social  Work.  She  is 
also  a  member  of  the  American  As- 
sociation of  Social  Work,  governor  of 
the  Utah  Province  of  Pi  Gamma  Mu, 
a  national  social  service  honor  society, 
member  of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the 
Utah  State  Training  School,  vice-pres- 
ident of  the  Community  Chest  and  of 
the  Utah  Tuberculosis  Association.  On 
Sept.  9,  1896,  she  was  married  to  Dr. 
Richard  R.  Lyman,  who  in  1918  became 
one  of  the  Quorum  of  Twelve  Apostles. 
One  son  and  one  daughter  were  born 
of  this  marriage. 

McCUNE,  Elizabeth  Ann  Claridge, 

a  member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  from  May  25,  1911,  to 
April  2,  1921,  was  born  Feb.  19,  1852, 
at  Leighton-Buzzard,  Bedfordshire, 
England,  a  daughter  of  Samuel  Clar- 
idge and  Charlotte  Joy.  Her  parents 
sacrificed  their  comfortable  position  in 
England  and  came  to  Utah  in  1853, 
when  she  was  11  months  old.  She  was 
a  member  of  the  General  Board  of 
Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  for  some  years  and  was 
chairman  of  the  women's  committee 
for  the  Genealogical  Society  of  Utah. 
She  attended  the  International  Con- 
gress of  Women  in  London  in  1899  and 
in  Rome  in  1914.  Sister  McCune  was 
an  ordinance  worker  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  for  twenty  years,  and  through 
her  influence  her  husband,  Alfred  Mc- 
Cune, who  was  a  financier,  donated 
$5,000  to  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  She 
was  the  mother  of  nine  children,  six 
sons  and  three  daughters,  and  died 
August  1,  1924.  (See  also  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p.  GG7.) 

McLELLAND,  Sarah  M.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  1911  to  1935,  was  born  Aug.  9, 
1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Thomas  M.  McLelland  and  Eliza- 
beth Murphy.    She  attended  the  school 


of  Dr.  Karl  G.  Maeser,  was  a  teacher 
and  teacher  ti-aining  leader  in  the  Sun- 
day School  of  Farmers  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City  and  served  ten  years  as  a 
counselor  and  five  years  as  a  class 
leader  in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  same 
ward.  She  served  four  years  as  a 
stake  board  member  and  counselor  in 
the  Granite  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  and, 
when  called  to  the  General  Board  of 
Relief  Society,  assisted  in  establishing 
the  Burial  Clothes  Depaz'tment  at  the 
Relief  Society  headquarters.  Sister 
McLelland  filled  a  mission  to  the  Cen- 
tral States  in  1909-1910  and  was  a 
missionary  on  the  Temple  Block  for 
a  number  of  years.  For  seventeen 
years  she  assisted  her  mother  in  rear- 
ing six  children  left  motherless  by  the 
death  of  her  twin  brother's  wife. 

MADSEN,  Emelia  D.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  10,  1892,  to  Oct.  5,  1902, 
was  born  June  16,  1848,  at  Skjelskor, 
Soro  amt,  Sjelland,  Denmark,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Ulrik  J.  J.  Dahlgren  and  Anna 
Sophie  Basse.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  the  restored  gospel  she  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  22,  1869,  and  came  to  Utah 
with  some  of  the  missionaries  in  1871. 
She  made  her  home  in  Brigham  City, 
where  she  joined  the  Relief  Society 
and  in  1872  became  assistant  secre- 
tary. On  July  30,  1875,  she  was  ap- 
pointed first  counselor  and  treasurer 
in  the  Retrenchment  Association  (later 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.)  She  was  president 
of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Brigham 
City  3rd  Ward  from  1878  to  1887, 
fostering  much  culture  in  dramatics. 
She  was  deeply  interested  in  wheat 
gathering  and  sericulture,  which  the 
Relief  Societies  had  been  called  upon 
to  promote.  When  the  Relief  Society 
became  incorpoi'ated  in  1892,  she  was 
appointed  one  of  the  directors  on  the 
General  Board,  a  position  she  held  for 
ten  years.  Sister  Madsen  was  the  first 
representative  in  the  Brigham  City 
3rd  Ward  Genealogical  Society,  hold- 
ing that  position  from  1913  to  1918. 
On  Nov.  10,  1873,  she  was  married  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


193 


Peter  F.  Madsen  and  became  the 
mother  of  11  children.  She  died  Dec. 
2,  1929. 

MADSEN,  Helena  E.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  10,  1892,  to  Oct.  5,  1902, 
was  the  wife  of  Bishop  Christian  A. 
Madsen  of  Gunnison,  Sanpete  Co., 
Utah.  Sister  Madsen  was  always  very 
active  in  public  affairs  and  served 
respectively  as  president  of  the  ward 
Primary  Association  and  of  the  ward 
Relief  Society  until  called  to  be  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society.  She  died  at  Gunnison  Nov. 
20,  1906. 

MINER,  Laura  M.  Hyde,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  10,  1892,  to  April  5,  1898, 
was  born  May  21,  1837,  at  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  a-  daughter  of  Apostle  Orson 
Hyde  and  Miranda  M.  Johnson.  After 
being  exiled  from  Nauvoo  she  resided 
for  some  time  at  Winter  Quarters  and 
came  to  Utah  with  her  parents  in  1853. 
On  May  30,  1859  she  was  married  to 
Aurelius  Miner,  a  rising  young  lawyer 
who  later  became  a  distinguished 
judge.  She  officiated  in  the  Logan 
Temple  for  several  years  and  coming 
to  Salt  Lake  City  became  a  charter 
member  of  the  Reapers'  Club.  She 
was  a  great  reader,  a  fine  conversa- 
tionalist and  had  definite  literary  abil- 
ity. She  was  the  mother  of  nine  chil- 
dren and  died  in  August,  1909. 

NEBEKER,  Emeline  Free  Young,  a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  since  Dec.  11,  1929,  was 
born  Sept.  27,  1875,  at  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  Hyrum  Smith 
Young  and  Lucy  Georgiana  Fox.  She 
is  a  graduate  of  the  L.  D.  S.  College 
and  the  Normal  School  of  the  Univei'- 
sity  of  Utah,  and  served  as  vice-presi- 
dent of  the  U.  of  U.  Alumni.  She  has 
held  office  in  all  the  women's  auxiliai-y 
organizations  of  the  Church  and  pre- 
vious to  being  called  to  the  General 
Board  of  Relief  Society  served  on  the 


Primary  Board  of  the  Ensign  Stake. 
She  has  been  president  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Woman's  Republican  Club,  mem- 
ber of  the  President's  Patriotic  Coun- 
cil, member  of  the  Board  of  Directors 
of  the  Woman's  Republican  Club, 
chairman  of  Welfare  Committee, 
Woman's  Legislative  Council,  vice- 
chairman  of  the  Community  Chest 
Board,  Salt  Lake  City,  member  of  Salt 
Lake  County  Welfare  Board  and  State 
regent  of  Utah  Daughters  of  Revolu- 
tion. On  Feb.  7,  1900,  she  was  mar- 
ried to  Walter  Dilworth  Nebeker  and 
is  the  mother  of  two  children. 

NIBLEY,  Rebecca  Neibaur,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  So- 
ciety from  October,  1909,  to  April, 
1921,  was  born  March  30,  1851,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Alex- 
ander Neibaur  and  Ellen  Breakel.  Her 
father  was  the  first  Jew  to  join  the 
L.  D.  S.  Church.  She  joined  the  Re- 
lief Society  at  the  age  of  16  and  was 
a  member  for  61  years,  serving  as  vis- 
iting teacher,  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency and  as  president  of  a  ward  or- 
ganization, before  being  called  to  act 
on  the  General  Board  of  Relief  So- 
ciety. She  was  chairman  of  the  Re- 
lief Society  Home  for  women  and 
girls,  a  member  of  the  Relief  Society 
Magazine  Finance  Committee  when 
the  magazine  was  established,  and  a 
member  of  the  committee  which  super- 
vised the  purchase  of  linen,  contrib- 
uted by  the  Board  to  the  L.  D.  S. 
Hospital.  On  March  30,  1869,  she  was 
married  to  Charles  W.  Nibley  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  ten  children.  Sis- 
ter Nibley  died  July  2,  1928.  (See 
also  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
2,  p.  675.) 

PENROSE,   Dr.  Romania  B.  Pratt, 

assistant  secretary  of  the  Central 
Board  of  Relief  Society  from  1888  to 
1892  and  member  of  the  General  Board 
from  1892  to  1921,  was  born  Aug.  8, 
1839,  at  Washington,  Wayne  Co.,  In- 
diana, a  daughter  of  Luther  Bunnell 
and  Esther  Mendenhall.  For  a  time  she 


Vol.  IV.  No.  13 


March  28.  1936 


194 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


resided  with  her  parents  at  Nauvoo, 
111.,  and  came  to  Utah  in  1855.  On 
Feb.  23,  1859,  she  was  married  to  Par- 
ley P.  Pratt,  jun.,  and  became  the 
mother  of  seven  children.  Being  am- 
bitious, she  studied  medicine  and  grad- 
uated from  the  Women's  Medical  Col- 
lege in  Pennsylvania  in  1877,  the  first 
L.  D.  S.  woman  graduate  in  medicine; 
later  she  studied  at  the  Eye  and  Ear 
Infirmary,  in  New  York  City,  and  at 
the  opening  of  the  Deseret  Hospital  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  became  a  member  of 
the  board  of  directors  of  that  institu- 
tion and  physician  in  charge  of  the 
ear,  nose  and  throat  cases.  Repre- 
senting the  Relief  Society  she  attended 
a  convention  of  the  International 
Council  of  Women  in  Holland.  She 
was  married  to  Pres.  Chas.  W.  Pen- 
rose in  1886,  and  dui'ing  his  presidency 
of  the  European  Mission  (1906  to 
1910)  she  presided  over  the  Relief  So- 
cieties of  the  mission.  Sister  Penrose 
died  Nov.  9,  1932. 

PITCHFORTH,    Mary    Mitchell,    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  from  Oct.  10,  1892,  to  Feb. 
15,  1901,  was  born  Aug.  26,  1825,  at 
Leominster,  Herefordshire,  England. 
She  and  her  husband,  Samuel  Pitch- 
forth,  came  to  Utah  in  1847  in  Dan- 
iel Spencer's  Company.  Sister 
Pitchforth  died  at  Nephi,  Juab  Co., 
Utah,  Nov.  20,  1907. 

REYNOLDS,  Alice  Louise,  editor  of 
the  "Relief  Society  Magazine,"  and 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  from  Feb.  7,  1923,  to  Sept.  1, 
1930,  was  born  April  1,  1873,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  George 
Reynolds  and  Mary  Ann  Tuddenham. 
She  was  graduated  from  the  Brigham 
Young  University  in  1890  and  took 
an  A.  B.  degree  from  Brigham  Young 
University  in  1910;  and  has  had  addi- 
tional training  at  the  Universities  of 
Michigan,  Chicago,  California,  Colum- 
bia, and  London.  She  is  Professor  of 
English  Literature  at  the  Brigham 
Young  University.    She  has  pioneered 


courses  in  Chaucer,  Shakespeare,  His- 
tory of  the  English  Novel,  History  of 
Modern  Drama,  Romantic  Poets,  and 
Tennyson  and  Browning  in  that  insti- 
tution. She  has  also  prepared  fifteen 
courses  of  study  for  the  Relief  Society 
General  Board,  as  well  as  lessons  for 
the  Sunday  School  and  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
general  boards.  She  has  traveled 
considerably  in  America  and  in  Eu- 
rope and  has  delivered  lectures  of  his- 
toric and  literary  interest  on  numei'ous 
occasions,  and  has  been  a  delegate  to 
a  number  of  national  conventions.  A 
library  at  the  Brigham  Young  Uni- 
versity has  been  endowed  and  named 
in  her  honor  the  "Alice  Louise  Rey- 
nolds Library."  Thei'e  are  twelve  lit- 
erary organizations  known  as  the 
Alice  Louise  Reynolds  Club.  They  are 
found  in  Utah  from  Salt  Lake  City 
to  St.  George,  and  one  is  in  New  York 
City.  Her  name  is  found  in  Women 
of  the  West,  Women  of  America  and 
in  Who's  Who  In  Education." 

RICHARDS,  Barbara  Howell,  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  So- 
ciety from  April  2,  1921,  to  April  4, 
1929,  was  born  Feb.  20,  1888,  at  Wells- 
ville,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Joseph  Howell  and  Mary  Maughan. 
She  received  her  education  at  the  B. 
Y.  College,  at  the  Utah  Agricultural 
College  at  Logan,  Utah,  and  at  Mt. 
Vernon  Seminary,  Washington,  D.  C. 
She  spent  14  years  at  Washington,  D. 
C,  where  her  father  served  as  Con- 
gressman for  the  State  of  Utah.  On 
Sept.  12,  1912,  she  was  married  to 
Preston  D.  Richards  and  resided  in  the 
20th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  where  she 
presided  over  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  She 
is  the  mother  of  two  children,  and  in 
1929  the  family  moved  to  California, 
where  she  is  still  actively  engaged  in 
Church  work. 

RICHARDS,    Emily   Sophia,   was   a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  from  Oct.  10,  1892,  to  April 
2,  1921.  (For  biographical  sketch  see 
page  109.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


1J>5 


RICHARDS,  Jane  Snyder,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Relief  Society  in  Nauvoo 
and  of  the  Central  and  General  Boards 
of  Relief  Society  in  Utah  from  1888 
to  1910,  was  born  Jan.  31,  1823,  at 
Pamelia,  Jefferson  Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Isaac  Richards  and  Lovise  Com 
stock  Snyder.  She  was  married  to 
Franklin  D.  Richards,  Dec.  18,  1842, 
and  came  to  Utah  with  her  husband 
in  1848.  Bro.  Richards,  who  in  1849 
was  called  to  the  apostleship,  estab- 
lished permanent  residence  in  Ogden 
in  1869,  where  Sister  Richards  pre- 
sided over  the  Relief  Society,  and  was 
the  first  president  of  the  Weber  Stake 
Relief  Society,  organized  July  19,  1877, 
by  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  This  posi- 
tion she  held  for  31  years,  and  was 
first  counselor  in  the  general  presi- 
dency of  Relief  Society  from  1888  to 
1901.  She  was  one  of  Utah's  repre- 
sentatives at  the  National  Council  of 
Women  in  1891,  when  the  Relief  So- 
ciety and  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  became  affili- 
ated with  that  organization.  She  was 
also  vice  president  of  the  Utah  Board 
of  Lady  Managers  of  the  Woild's  P'air 
at  Chicago,  111.,  in  1893.  Sister  Rich- 
ards was  the  mother  of  six  children 
and  died  Nov.  17,  1912. 

ROBERTS,  Lillian  Cameron,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  So- 
ciety from  Dec.  13,  1916,  to  Feb.  7, 
1923,  was  born  Jan.  22,  1882,  a  daugh- 
ter of  David  Cameron  and  Sarah  Ann 
Child.  She  served  as  a  teacher  in  the 
Sunday  School  and  as  a  counselor  in 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  11th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  has  held  the  fol- 
lowing positions  in  the  Relief  Society: 
member  of  Ensign  Stake  Board,  mem- 
ber of  Taylor  Stake  Board,  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  Taylor  Stake 
Board,  and  president  of  Raymond  1st 
Ward  Relief  Society  since  1930.  She 
was  a  clerk  in  the  Church  Historian's 
Office  from  1907  to  1908,  when  she  was 
placed  in  charge  of  the  Genealogical 
library  and  office;  later  she  was  ap- 
pointed librarian,  which  position  she 
held  until  1923.    After  moving  to  Can- 


ada she  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Taylor  Stake  and  Raymond  1st  Ward 
genealogical  committees.  In  1923  she 
was  married  to  I.  Bliss  Roberts  of 
Raymond,  Alberta,  Canada,  where  she 
has  since  made  her  home.  She  has  one 
daughter  and  has  mothered  five  of  her 
husband's  children. 

ROBISON,  Louise  Y.,  seventh  Gen- 
eral President  of  the  National  Wom- 
an's Relief  Society,  was  born  May  27, 
1866,  at  Scipio,  Millard  Co.,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Thomas  Yates  and  Eliza- 
beth Francis.  She  attended  the  public 
schools  and  Brigham  Young  Academy 
and,  being  a  natural  leader,  held  office 
in  the  auxiliary  organizations,  includ- 
ing that  of  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  in  the  First  and  Emerson  wards 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  She  served  on  the 
Granite  Stake  Genealogical  Board,  and 
was  a  member  and  first  counselor  in 
the  Granite  Stake  Relief  Society 
Board.  Sister  Robison  has  been  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society  since  April  2,  1921,  serv- 
ing first  as  second  counselor  and 
has  been  General  President  of  Relief 
Society  since  Oct.  8,  1928.  During  her 
presidency  the  Relief  Societies  in  Utah 
have  vigorously  supported  the  move- 
ment of  a  State  Training  School  for 
the  feeble-minded  and  was  largely  re- 
sponsible for  its  establishment.  The 
Relief  Society  has  also  placed  a  beau- 
tiful monument  in  Nauvoo,  111., 
marking  the  site  of  the  building,  in  the 
upper  room  of  which  the  National 
Woman's  Relief  Society  (first  known 
as  the  Female  Relief  Society)  was  or- 
ganized by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith, 
Mar.  17,  1842.  The  dedication  of  this 
monument  occurred  July  24,  1933.  Sis- 
ter Robison  supervised  work  of  the  Red 
Cross  gauze  room  at  the  Gardo  House, 
Salt  Lake  City,  during  the  World  war, 
and  was  instructor  in  surgical  dress- 
ings. She  is  a  director  of  the  Utah 
Tuberculosis  Association  and  member 
of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Visit- 
ing Nurses  Association,  and  of  the 
Utah  State  Public  Welfare  Board.   She 


196 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


is  a  member  of  the  board  of  directors 
of  the  Travelers'  Aid  Society  and  has 
attended  two  national  conventions  of 
this  organization.  She  was  a  delegate 
to  the  National  Conference  of  Social 
Work,  to  the  National  Women's  Chris- 
tian Temperance  Union,  to  the  Nation- 
al Council  of  Women,  and  to  the  Inter- 
national Congiess  of  Women  at  the 
Century  of  Progress  Fair  at  Chicago 
in  1933,  where  she  presided  at  one  of 
the  general  sessions  of  the  Congress. 
She  was  also  a  delegate  from  the 
United  States  to  the  International 
Council  of  Women  at  Paris,  France  in 
1935,  and  has  traveled  extensively  in 
America  and  in  Europe  in  the  interest 
of  the  Relief  Society.  On  Oct.  11,  1883, 
she  was  married  to  Joseph  Lyman 
Robison  and  is  the  mother  of  six  chil- 
dren. 

SHIPP,  Dr.  Ellis  R,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Relief  Society  from 
1898  to  1907,  was  born  Jan.  20,  1847,  in 
Davis  County,  Iowa,  a  daughter  of 
William  F.  Reynolds  and  Anna  Haw- 
ley.  She  came  to  Utah  in  1853  with 
her  parents  and  was  educated  in  the 
local  gi-ade  schools  and  the  Univer- 
sity of  Deseret.  She  attended  the 
Women's  Medical  College  of  Penn- 
sylvania and  graduated  therefrom  in 
1878  with  the  degree  of  Doctor  of 
Medicine,  being  the  second  Utah  wom- 
an to  graduate  from  an  Eastern  Medi- 
cal institution;  later  she  took  gradu- 
ate work  at  the  University  of  Michi- 
gan Medical  School.  She  practiced 
medicine  for  many  years  in  Utah  and 
was  one  of  the  staff  physicians  of  the 
Deseret  Hospital.  She  has  always 
been  very  modest  in  her  prices  and 
has  never  refused  aid  to  any  in  dis- 
tress. Her  teaching  activities,  embrac- 
ing obstetrics  and  hygienic  living- 
covered  a  period  of  more  than  fifty 
years.  Sister  Shipp  is  a  poetess  and 
one  of  whom  Utah  is  justly  proud.  In 
1910  she  published  a  volume  of  poems 
entitled  "Life  Lines".  On  May  5, 
1866,  she  was  married  to  Dr.  Milford 
B.   Shipp  and  became   the  mother  of 


ten  children.  She  is  still  (1936)  ac- 
tive and  preparing  to  celebrate  her 
UOth  birthday  anniversary. 

SMITH,   Bathsheba   Wilson,  was   a 

charter  member  of  the  Female  Relief 
Society  organized  by  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  on  March 
17,  1842,  and  became  fourth  general 
president  of  the  General  Board  of  Re- 
lief Society.  She  was  born  May  3, 
1822,  at  Shinnston,  Harrison  Co.,  West 
Virginia,  a  daughter  of  Mark  Bigler 
and  Susannah  Ogden.  In  1837  she  was 
baptized  and  located  in  Nauvoo  where 
she  became  well  acquainted  with  Jos- 
eph Smith's  family  and  was  married  to 
George  A.  Smith,  the  Prophet's  cousin, 
July  25,  1841,  and  became  the  mother 
of  two  children.  She  officiated  as  an 
ordinance  worker  in  the  Nauvoo  Tem- 
ple, in  the  Endowment  House  in  Salt 
Lake  City  and  in  the  Logan  and  Salt 
Lake  temples  in  Utah,  and  presided 
over  the  women's  department  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple  from  the  late  nine- 
ties until  her  death.  Sister  Smith  was 
a  counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Cent)-al  Board  of  Relief  Society  from 
1888  to  1892  and  in  the  presidency  of 
the  General  Board  frozn  1892  to  1901, 
when  she  became  general  president 
of  the  Relief  Society.  During  her 
presidency  the  headquarters  of  the 
General  Board  weie  established  in  the 
Bishop's  Building.  Sister  Smith  died 
Sept.  20,  1910,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
(For  further  details  see  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  699.) 

SMITH,  Emma  Hale,  wife  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  the  first 
president  of  the  Relief  Society  in  1842- 
1844,  was  born  July  10,  1804,  in  Har- 
mony, Susquehanna  Co.,  Pennsylvania, 
a  daughter  of  Isaac  Hale  and  Elizabeth 
Lewis.  She  was  a  faithful  wife  and 
mother  and  during  times  of  persecu- 
tion her  home  was  always  open  to  the 
sick  and  needy.  She  supervised  the 
work  of  boarding  and  clothing  the 
men  engaged  in  building  the  temples 
at  Kirtland  and   Nauvoo,  and  during 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


I'.iT 


the  persecutions  in  Illinois,  she,  in 
company  with  others,  journeyed  to 
Quincy,  111.,  and  presented  a  memorial 
to  Gov.  Carlin  in  behalf  of  her  people. 
She  was  appointed  to  make  a  selec- 
tion of  hymns  to  be  used  by  the  Church 
in  Nauvoo,  many  of  which  are  included 
in  the  L.  D.  S.  hymn  book.  When  the 
.saints  were  expelled  from  Illinois  in 
1846,  Emma  Smith  chose  to  lemain  in 
Nauvoo,  where  she  later  manied 
Major  Lewis  C.  Bidamon  in  1847. 
She  died  in  Nauvoo  April  30,  1879. 
She  was  the  mother  of  four  sons  and 
adopted  a  daughter.  (For  further  de- 
tails see  Biographical  Encyclopedia, 
Vol.  1,  p.  692.) 

SMITH,  Ethel  Reynold.s,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  April  2,  1921,  to  February,  1936, 
was  born  Oct.  23,  1889,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  George 
Reynolds  and  Amelia  Schofield.  She 
was  an  efficient  worker  in  the  various 
organizations  of  the  Church  from  her 
early  girlhood  and  woi'ked  for  a  time 
in  the  Church  Historian's  office.  For 
several  years  she  served  as  chairman 
of  the  Genealogical  Department  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Relief  Society  and 
as  assistant  to  Willard  Young  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Genealogical  Society. 
On  Nov.  2,  1908,  she  was  married  to 
Joseph  Fielding  Smith,  member  of  the 
Quorum  of  the  Twelve,  and  is  the 
mother  of  nine  children;  she  has  also 
reared  two  of  her  husband's  daugh- 
ter's by  a  former  wife. 

SMITH,  Julina  Lambson.  member  of 
the  Genei'al  Board  of  Relief  Society 
fi'om  1892  to  1921  and  second  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  that  organization 
from  ]910  to  1921,  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Jan.  10,  1936.    (See  page  68.) 

SNOW,  Eliza  Roxey,  secretary  of 
the  first  Relief  Society,  organized  by 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  in  Nauvoo, 
111.,  March  17,  1842,  and  second  gen- 
eral pi'esident  of  the  Relief  Society 
(1866-1887)    was  born   Jan.   21,   1804, 


at  Becket,  Berkshire  Co.,  Mass.,  a 
daughter  of  Oliver  Snow  and  Rosetta 
Leonora  Pettibone.  She  was  bap- 
tized April  5,  1835,  in  Mantua,  Ohio, 
and  came  to  Utah  in  September,  1847. 
She  was  a  brilliant,  versatile  and  high- 
ly spiritual  woman,  a  student  of  liter- 
ature and  a  poetess;  also  an  executive 
and  organizer  of  rare  ability.  At  the 
age  of  22  she  wrote  for  the  press  a 
requiem  for  John  Adams  and  Thomas 
Jefferson.  Her  first  prize  story  was 
published  in  Cody's  Lady's  Magazine. 
She  was  also  the  author  of  a  book  of 
poems,  and  of  a  number  of  hymns, 
including  "O  My  Father".  In  1854  she 
commenced  organizing  ward  Relief 
Societies  and  acted  as  president  of  all 
the  women's  organizations  in  the 
Church  until  1880,  when  Pres.  John 
Taylor  segregated  the  different  organi- 
zations and  set  her  apart  as  president 
of  the  Relief  Society.  When  the  En- 
dowment House  in  Salt  Lake  City  was 
dedicated  in  1855,  she  was  called  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  preside  over 
the  women's  department.  She  was 
also  president  of  the  Deseret  Hospital 
Board  and  was  a  member  of  the  Poly- 
sophical  Society  founded  in  1854  by 
Lorenzo  Snow,  her  brother,  and  Wil- 
liam Eddington.  She  went  to  Pales- 
tine in  1872  with  the  Geo.  A.  Smith 
company  of  missionaries;  they  return- 
ed in  1873.  Sister  Snow  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Dec.  5,  1887.  (See  also 
Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p. 
693.) 

SNOW,  Minerva  White,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  1892  to  1896,  was  born  March 
22,  1822,  at  Northbridge,  Worcester 
Co.,  Mass.,  a  daughter  of  Alden  White 
and  Achsah  Wing.  She  was  baptized  at 
the  age  of  18  and  with  her  parents 
emigrated  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  where  she 
became  personally  acquainted  with  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  On  April  2, 
1844,  she  was  married  to  Elder  Eras- 
tus  Snow,  and  came  to  Utah  soon  after 
the  pioneers.  In  1861,  when  her  hus- 
band was  called  to  supervise  coloniza- 


198 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


tion  in  southern  Utah,  Sister  Minerva 
presided  over  the  Relief  Societies 
there  and  was  president  of  the  St. 
George  Stake  Relief  Society  from 
1878  to  1885.  She  was  also  a  worker 
in  the  St.  George,  Logan  and  Manti 
temples.  She  was  the  mother  of  two 
children  and  died  at  Manti,  Utah,  April 
1,   1896. 

SORENSEN,  Donna  Durant,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society,  was  born  Dec.  24,  1904.  at 
Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Lorenzo  J.  Durrant  and  Agnes  P. 
Lewis.  She  entered  the  B.  Y.  U. 
Training  School  in  the  sixth  grade  and 
continued  at  this  institution  until  she 
was  graduated  in  1927  with  a  B.  S. 
degree.  She  taught  English  and 
speech  at  the  American  Fork  High 
School  for  two  years  and  filled  a  two 
years'  mission  to  the  Central  States. 
She  has  served  as  teacher  in  Sunday 
School,  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  and  Relief  So- 
ciety and  was  a  member  of  the  Wells 
Stake  Relief  Society  Board,  being  so- 
cial service  class  leader  in  that  organi- 
zation. On  Oct.  10,  1929,  she  mar- 
ried Wesley  A.  Sorensen,  a  graduate 
of  the  Utah  Agricultural  College. 

SPAFFORD,  Belle  Smith,  a  member 
of  the  General  Boaid  of  Relief  Society, 
was  born  Oct.  8,  1895,  a  daughter  of 
John  Gibson  Smith  and  Hester  McIMur- 
rin  Sims.  She  was  educated  in  the 
Salt  Lake  City  public  schools,  the 
L.  D.  S.  College,  the  B.  Y.  University 
and  is  a  graduate  from  the  Normal 
School  of  the  University  of  Utah. 
She  has  taught  in  the  city  schools 
and  in  the  Brigham  Young  University 
Training  School.  She  presided  over 
the  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  of  the  Belvedere 
Ward  four  years,  was  a  member  of 
the  Utah  Stake  Board  of  Religion 
Classes  for  three  years,  a  counselor  in 
the  Relief  Society  of  B^I^ederc  Waid 
three  years,  a  member  of  the  Relief 
Society  boards  of  the  Grant  and  Wells 
Stakes  and  counselor  in  the  i)residency 
of    the     Wells     Stake    Relief     Society 


Board.  On  March  23,  1921,  she  was 
married  to  Willis  Earl  Spaffoi'd  and  is 
the  mother  of  two  children. 

STANDRLNG,  Rebecca  E.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief 
Society  fi'om  1896  to  1902,  was  born 
Feb.  20,  1828,  in  Northampton,  Eng- 
land, a  daughter  of  William  Smith  and 
Charlotte  Ford.  She  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Church  in  England  in 
Februa)y,  1851  and  emigrated  to 
America  in  1855,  arriving  in  Salt 
Lake  City  in  1857.  At  the  time  of 
the  "move"  she  went  to  Springville, 
and  in  1859  was  married  to  Edwin 
Standring  at  Lehi,  where  she  made 
her  permanent  home.  She  was  the 
first  woman  teacher  in  the  Sunday 
schools  in  Lehi,  which  position  she 
filled  for  30  years.  She  was  secretary 
of  the  Lehi  Ward  Relief  Society  for 
ten  years  and  president  for  22  years; 
also  president  of  the  Alpine  Stake 
Relief  Society  for  12  years.  Sister 
Standring  was  an  ordinance  workei- 
in  the  St.  George,  Manti  and  Salt 
Lake  temples  and  died  Dec.  19,  1913. 
She  had  no  children  of  her  own,  but 
adopted   two. 

STEVENSON.  Elizabeth  Jane  Du 
Fresne,  was  a  member  of  the  General 
Boaid  of  Relief  Society  from  Oct.  2, 
1900,  until  her  death  April  25,  1906, 
which  occurred  while  she  was  in  at- 
tendance at  a  Relief  Society  Confer- 
ence in  the  Emery  Stake.  She  was 
horn  Feb.  8,  1838,  at  St.  Heliers,  Lsland 
of  Jersey,  England,  emigrated  to  L'tah 
with  her  family  in  1854  and  was  mar- 
ried to  Edward  Stevenson  Oct.  28, 
1855.  Her  home  was  always  open  to 
saints  upon  their  arrival  in  Zion.  She 
was  a  charter  member  of  the  14th 
Ward  Relief  Society.  Salt  Lake  City, 
acted  as  a  visiting  teacher  in  the  or- 
ganization for  15  years,  and  was  a 
worker  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  fi-oni 
the  time  of  its  opening  in  1893  until 
lier  death.  She  was  the  mother  of 
eight  children.  (See  also  Biograjiliical 
Encyclopedia.    Vol.   2,   p.    716.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


190 


THOMAS,  Carrie  S.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Boai'd  of  Relief  Society 
from  Oct.  5,  1902,  to  April  2,  1921, 
was  born  April  22,  1848,  at  Plymouth, 
England,  a  daughter  of  Michael  and 
Jane  Stockdale.  She  was  educated  in 
English  schools  and  was  a  lady  of 
artistic  temperament  and  literary  at- 
tainments. She  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1864  and  the  following  year  was  mar- 
ried to  Richard  K.  Thomas.  She  was 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 
7th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  for  a  num- 
ber of  years  and  attended  conven- 
tions of  the  National  Council  of 
Women  in  Cleveland,  Ohio  and  at 
Washington,  D.  C.  She  also  traveled 
in  Europe,  accompanied  by  her  daugh- 
ters. She  was  a  charter  member  of 
the  Utah  Women's  Press  Club  and 
Reapers'  Club.  Sister  Thomas  was  the 
mother  of  twelve  children,  eight  of 
whom  were  living  at  the  time  of  her 
death  which  occurred  April  5,  1931. 

THOMPSON,  Janet  Lennox  Mur- 
dock,  a  member  of  the  General  Board 
of  Relief  Society,  was  born  Aug.  8, 
1886,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daugh- 
ter of  David  Lennox  Murdock  and 
Elizabeth  Pinkerton  Thyne.  She  has 
been  active  in  the  Church  organiza- 
tions since  her  early  youth  when  she 
served  as  organist  in  a  ward  Primar.y 
Association.  She  was  president  of  a 
Primary  Association  for  five  years, 
organist  and  teacher  in  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A., 
and  Sunday  school  and  a  counselor  on 
the  Ensign  Stake  Primary  Board  for 
thirteen  years.  She  was  also  organist 
for  three  years  and  president  four 
years  of  the  Ensign  Stake  Relief  So- 
ciety. Sister  Thompson  has  ti-aveled 
extensively  in  the  United  States  and  in 
Europe  and  is  interested  in  civil  mat- 
ters. She  is  an  officer  in  the  Com- 
munity Chest  organization,  and  was 
a  member  of  the  Red  Cross  during  the 
World  war.  On  Sept.  29,  1909,  she 
was  married  to  Jerrold  E.  Thompson 
and  resides  in   Salt  Lake  City. 


WELLS,  Emmeline  Blanch  Wood- 
ward, fifth  general  president  of  Re- 
lief Society,  was  born  Feb.  29,  1828,  at 
Petersham,  Worcester  Co.,  Mass.,  a 
daughter  of  David  Woodward  and 
Diadama  Hare.  She  was  educated  in 
select  schools  and  by  private  instruc- 
tors. At  the  age  of  84  she  received  the 
honorary  degree  of  Doctor  of  Litera- 
ture from  the  Brigham  Young  Uni- 
versity. In  1845  she  was  mai-ried  in 
Nauvoo,  111.,  to  Presiding  Bishop 
Newel  K.  Whitney  and  in  1848  she 
came  to  Utah  with  Bishop  Whitney's 
family.  Bishop  Whitney  died  Sept. 
23,  1850  and  in  1852  Sister  Emmeline 
was  married  to  Elder  Daniel  H.  Wells. 
In  1866,  Pres.  Brigham  Young  in- 
structed Sister  Eliza  R.  Snow  to  as- 
sist the  Bishops  to  organize  Relief 
Societies  in  the  various  wards  of  the 
Church,  in  which  she  was  assisted  by 
Sister  Emmeline  B.  Wells.  In  1888  Sis- 
ter Wells  became  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  Relief  Society,  serving 
successively  as  corresponding  secre- 
tary and  general  secretary  of  that  or- 
ganization. She  became  general  presi- 
dent in  1910,  which  oflFice  she  held  until 
1921,  her  death  occurring  April  25, 
1921.  In  1874  she  became  assistant 
editor  of  the  "Woman's  Exponent," 
the  organ  of  the  Relief  Society,  and 
was  editor  and  publisher  of  that  per- 
iodical from  1876  to  1914.  She  also 
published  two  editions  of  her  poems 
and  numerous  pamphlets  and  bro- 
chures. She  organized  the  "Reapers' 
Club"  and  the  "Utah  Woman's  Press 
Club"  and  also  women's  literary  or- 
ganizations, in  which  she  fostered 
talent  by  publishing  writings  of  the 
members  in  the  "Exponent."  Sister 
Wells  was  appointed  chairman  of  the 
wheat  storing  movement  in  1876  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  continued 
to  advocate  the  cause  until  1918  when 
the  stored  wheat  was  turned  over  to 
the  United  States.  While  she  pre- 
sided over  the  Relief  Society,  the  Wel- 
fare Department  and  the  Burial 
Clothes    Department    were    organized 


200 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


at  Relief  Society  headquarters.  Sister 
Wells  was  a  pronounced  suffragist  and 
gave  service  in  organizing  both  state 
and  national  associations,  and  as  a 
delegate  to  women's  councils  she 
traveled  extensively  at  home  and 
abroad.  In  1928  the  women  of  the 
State  of  Utah  placed  a  marble  bust 
of  Mrs.  Wells  in  the  rotunda  of  the 
State  Capitol  in  recognition  of  her 
service  to  women.  Sister  Wells  was 
the  mother  of  six  children.  (See  also 
Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p. 
731.) 

WHITNEY,  Elizabeth   Ann,  was  a 

charter  member  of  the  Relief  Society 
organized  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  March  17, 
1842.  She  served  as  second  counselor 
to  Emma  Smith  in  that  organization 
and  as  second  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Central  Board  of  Relief 
Society  in  Utah  from  July  1,  1866, 
until  her  death  on  Feb.  15,  1883.  Sis- 
ter Whitney  was  born  Dec.  26,  1800, 
in  New  Haven  County,  Conn.,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Gibson  Smith  and  Polly  Bradley. 
She  was  married  to  Newel  K.  Whitney 
Oct.  20,  1822,  and  becoming  acquainted 
with  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  they 
were  baptized  in  November,  1830.  The 
Prophet  designated  Sister  Whitney  as 
"the  sweet  songstress  of  Zion."  She 
was  among  the  first  members  of  the 
Church  to  receive  the  gift  of  tongues, 
which  she  always  exercised  in  sing- 
ing, the  last  time  when  she  was  81 
years  of  age.  She  was  the  mother 
of  eleven  children.  Her  husband  be- 
came the  second  Presiding  Bishop  of 
the  Church. 

WILCOX,  Elizabeth  Jane  Stevenson, 

a  member  of  the  General  Boai-d  of 
Relief  Society  from  May  18,  1906  to 
April  2,  1921,  was  born  March  18, 
1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Edward  Stevenson  and 
Elizabeth  J.  Du  Fresne.  She  gradu- 
ated from  the  literary  department  of 
the  University  of  Utah  in  1881  and 
taught  school  for  some  years.  She 
was  a  teacher  in  the  Sunday  School 


of  the  14th  Ward  from  her  early 
"teens"  until  after  her  marriage  and 
served  as  treasurer,  secretary,  coun- 
selor and  president  of  the  14th  Ward 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  She  was  secretary  of 
the  17th  Ward  Relief  Society  for  five 
years  before  being  called  to  serve  on 
the  General  Board,  and  later  repre- 
sented the  Relief  Society  at  the  Na- 
tional Council  of  Women.  Sister  Wil- 
cox was  instrumental  in  the  establish- 
ment of  the  Utah  State  Kindergarten 
Association  and  was  a  charter  member 
and  a  counselor  in  the  organization  of 
the  Daughters  of  Utah  Pioneers.  On 
Dec.  25,  1884,  she  was  married  to  Dr. 
Charles  Frederick  Wilcox  and  became 
the  mother  of  six  children.  (See  also 
Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p. 
737.) 

WILLIAMS,  Clarissa  S.,  sixth  gen- 
eral president  of  the  General  Board  of 
Relief  Society  (1921-1928)  was  born 
April  21,  1859,  at  the  old  Historian's 
Office  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Apostle  George  A.  Smith 
(Church  Historian)  and  Susan  E. 
West.  She  was  educated  in  the  private 
school  of  Mary  Cook  and  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Deseret,  receiving  a  teach- 
er's certificate  from  the  latter  insti- 
tution. She  joined  the  Relief  Society 
as  a  young  girl  and  acted  in  the 
capacities  of  visiting  teacher,  secre- 
tary, ward  president,  stake  president, 
member  of  the  general  board,  general 
treasurer,  first  counselor  in  the  general 
presidency,  and  on  April  2,  1921,  was 
sustained  as  genei-al  president.  Mrs. 
Williams  who  was  possessed  of  fine 
business  ability,  centralized  the  funds 
of  the  General  Board  and  established 
the  business  affairs  of  the  board  on  a 
sound  business  basis.  She  represented 
the  Relief  Society  at  national  and  in- 
ternational councils  of  women  and  was 
a  delegate  to  Rome  in  1914,  after 
which  she  toured  Europe.  She  was  a 
charter  member  of  the  Daughters  of 
the  Revolution  and  of  the  Daughters 
of  Utah  Pioneers.  On  July  17,  1877, 
she  was  married  to  Wm.  N.  Williams 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENYLOPEDIA 


201. 


and  became  the  mother  of  eleven  chil- 
dren. Sister  Williams  died  March  8, 
1930.  (See  also  Biographical  Encyclo- 
pedia, Vol.  2,  p.  738.) 

WOODRUFF,  Emma  Smith,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Relief  So- 
ciety from  1892  to  1910,  was  born 
March  1,  1838,  at  Spring  Hill,  Daviess 
Co.,  Missouri,  a  daughter  of  Samuel 
Smith  and  Martishia  Smoot.  Her  fam- 
ily joined  the  Church  in  early  days 
and  moved  to  Nauvoo.  As  a  child  she 
was  greatly  impressed  by  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  and  all  her  life  remem- 
bered his  kindly  attitude  towards  her. 
She  came  to  Utah  in  1850,  and  in 
1853  was  married  to  Apostle  Wilford 
Woodruff  and  later  became  the  mother 
of  eight  children.  She  was  a  charter 
member  of  the  Retrenchment  Society 
and  later  presided  over  the  Farmei's 
Ward  Relief  Society.  She  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  first  Salt  Lake  Stake  Relief 
Society  Board  and  president  of  the 
Granite  Stake  Relief  Society.  When 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple  was  opened  in 
1893  she  was  chosen  as  an  ordinance 
worker,  serving  as  assistant  to  both 
Zina  D.  H.  Young  and  Bathsheba  W. 
Smith,  when  they  presided  over  the 
women's  department  there.  Sister 
Woodruff  died  March  4,  1912.  (See 
also  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
2,  p.  805.) 

YOUNG,  Zina  Diantha,  a  member 
of  the  Relief  Society  in  Nauvoo  and 
third  general  president  of  the  National 
Woman's  Relief  Society  (1888  to 
1901),  was  born  Jan.  31,  1821,  at 
Watertown,  Jefferson  Co.,  N.  Y.,  a 
daughter  of  William  Huntington  and 
Zina  Baker.  "Aunt  Zina,"  as  she  was 
affectionately  known,  was  baptized 
by  Elder  Hyrum  Smith  in  New 
York  in  August,  1835.  She  was  a 
member  of  the  temple  choir  at  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  and  came  to  Utah  in  Sep- 
tember, 1848.  She  was  a  wife  of 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  was  noted 
for  her  deep  spirituality  and  pleasing- 
personality.    She  was  especially  active 


in  caring  for  the  sick  and  pi-epared 
herself  for  this  work  by  taking  a 
course  in  nursing  and  midwifery  under 
Dr.  Willard  Richards.  She  later  es- 
tablished a  school  for  nursing  in  the 
old  Social  Hall.  Being  a  practical 
woman  she  made  her  own  candles, 
soap,  starch,  etc.,  before  such  things 
were  obtainable  except  at  a  very  high 
price.  She  was  a  carder,  spinner  and 
weaver  of  cloth  and  chairman  of  the 
sericulture  project  for  the  State  of 
Utah.  Before  becoming  general  presi- 
dent of  Relief  Society  she  had  served 
as  first  counselor  in  the  presidency  of 
the  Central  Board  of  Relief  Society 
from  1866  to  1888.  During  her  presi- 
dency, annual  dues  were  established, 
and  the  Relief  Society  became  affili- 
ated with  the  National  Council  of 
Women  (1891).  She  presided  over 
the  women  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  for 
a  number  of  years.  Sister  Young 
represented  the  Relief  Society  at  meet- 
ings of  the  National  Council  of  Wom- 
en, National  Woman's  Suffrage  Asso- 
ciation and  at  the  World  Congress  of 
Women  at  Chicago  in  1893.  Besides 
being  the  mother  of  three  children 
she  reared  four  other  children  as  her 
own.  She  died  Aug.  28,  1901.  (See 
also  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
1,  p.  697.) 


GENERAL  BOARD  OF  DESERET 
SUNDAY  SCHOOL  UNION 

AUSTIN,  Mark,  a  member  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union  Board 
since  1929,  was  born  Oct.  3,  1864,  in 
Studham,  Bedfordshire,  England,  a 
son  of  John  Austin  and  Emma  Grace. 
In  1868  he  came  to  Utah  with  his  par- 
ents, crossing  the  Atlantic  Ocean  on 
the  steamship  "Minnesota''  which  ar- 
rived in  New  York  harbor  July  12, 
1868.  Thence  the  emigrants  traveled 
by  rail  to  Laramie,  Wyoming,  and 
from  this  point,  as  passengers  in  Capt, 
Joseph  S.  Rawlins'  mule  train,  to  Salt 


202 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Lake  City  where  they  arrived  July  25, 
1868.  The  family  located  at  Lehi, 
Utah,   where  they   took   up  land   and 


were  among  the  foremost  farmers  to 
bring  about  the  successful  cultivation 
of  the  sugar  beet  when  the  sugar  fac- 
tory was  established  at  Lehi  in  1890. 
In  due  course  of  time  Bro.  Austin  be- 
came associated  with  the  Utah  and 
Idaho  sugar  factories,  and  when  in 
1904  a  sugar  factory  was  established 
at  a  point  about  five  miles  northeast 
of  Rexburg,  Idaho,  the  people  who 
had  located  in  its  vicinity  were  on  July 
24,  1904,  organized  as  the  Sugar  Ward 
with  Mark  Austin  as  Bishop.  Assisted 
by  the  Saints  of  the  ward,  he  erected 
a  modern  meeting  house,  a  rock  build- 
ing, said  to  be  the  finest  chapel  in  the 
Fremont  Stake  at  that  time.  On  June 
30,  1905,  Bishop  Austin  was  released 
as  Bishop  of  the  Sugar  Ward  and  ap- 
pointed a  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Fremont  Stake,  which  position 
he  held  until  1910,  when  he  was  called 
to  preside  over  the  Fremont  Stake  of 
Zion.  This  position  he  held  until  1925, 
when  he  was  honorably  released  to 
move  to  Salt  Lake  City,  the  headquar- 


ters of  the  sugar  business  of  the  State 
of  Utah.  In  1929  he  was  called  to  be 
a  member  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union  Board. 

In  1887  he  married  Marie  Vaughan 
in  the  Logan  Temple.  Five  of  the  six 
surviving  children  of  this  union  have 
already  been  married  in  the  Temple 
and  all  but  one  have  filled  missions, 
two  to  New  Zealand  and  two  to  Hol- 
land. Bro.  and  Sister  Austin  also  have 
both  filled  missions  to  Gi'eat  Britain. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  2,  p.  589.) 

BAILEY,  Dolores  Fay,  a  member 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
Board  is  of  Scotch-English  extraction. 


Her  father,  who  died  in  1934,  was  Reu- 
ben J.  Bailey;  her  mother,  who  resides 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  was  Alice  Park  be- 
fore her  marriage.  The  Baileys  and 
the  Parks  immigrated  from  Great 
Britain  to  Canada,  where  they  em- 
braced "Mormonism."  Shortly  after 
joining  the  Church  they  moved  to 
Utah,  settling  in  the  Salt  Lake  valley. 
Miss  Bailey  was  educated  in  the  pub- 
lic schools  of  Salt  Lake  County,  in- 
cluding the  Granite  High  School;  in 
the   Latter-day    Saints'  College,  from 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


203 


which  she  was  graduated  in  1927;  and 
in  the  University  of  Utah,  which  gave 
her  a  degree  in  science  (B.  S.)  in  1932. 
While  she  majored  in  education,  she 
did  considerable  work  in  Western  his- 
tory, in  which  she  is  greatly  interested. 
During  her  college  course  she  became 
a  member  of  Chi  Omega,  a  national 
sorority. 

In  religious  work  Miss  Bailey  has 
always  been  active.  Besides  having 
attended  the  auxiliary  organizations 
of  the  Church,  she  taught  a  Sunday 
School  class  for  several  years  in  Wil- 
ford  Ward,  where  she  makes  her  home. 
In  1934  she  became  a  member  of  the 
Grant  Stake  Sunday  School  Board, 
and  was  connected  with  that  group 
till  she  was  called  to  the  general 
board.  On  the  general  board,  of  which 
she  is  the  youngest  member  in  years, 
she  is  on  the  committee  which  has 
charge   of  the   Primary  Department. 

At  present  (1936)  Miss  Bailey  is 
a  teacher  in  the  fourth  grade  in  the 
Granite  School  district. 

BARKER,  James  Louis,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union  since  1928,  was 
born  July  27,  1880,  at  North  Ogden, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Henry  Barkei-  and 
Margaret  Stalle.  He  was  baptized  in 
1888  by  Joseph  Orton,  functioned  in 
various  offices  of  the  Aaronic  Priest- 
hood, was  oi'dained  an  Elder,  and  on 
June  25,  1901,  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Jos.  W.  McMurrin  and  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Switzerland.  Fiom  this 
mission  he  returned  Aug.  15,  1904. 

On  May  30,  1906,  Elder  Barker  mar- 
ried Kate  Montgomery,  a  daughter  of 
Nathaniel  Montgomery  and  Nancy 
Clark,  who  has  borne  him  one  son  and 
two  daughters.  She,  with  her  little 
family,  accompanied  her  husband  to 
Europe  and  remained  abroad  about 
eight  years  while  Bro.  Barker  studied 
in  Switzerland  and  the  University  of 
Paris.  Prof.  Barker  is  now  head  of 
the  Modern  Language  Department  of 
the    University   of   Utah. 


BENNETT,  John  Foster,  treasurer 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
since  1906,  was  born  July  11,  1865,  at 
Birmingham,  England,  the  son  of 
Richard  and  Maria  Foster  Bennett. 
Richard  Bennett  was  not  a  member 
of   the   Church,   but  was   honest    anil 


conscientious.  With  his  wife  and  two 
little  children  (one  the  subject  of  this 
sketch)  he  came  to  Utah  with  his 
wife's  family  in  1868.  The  Foster  fam- 
ily located  in  Bear  Lake  valley,  but 
Richard  Bennett  found  work  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  When  John  was  eight 
years  old  he  was  taken  by  one  of  his 
aunts  to  visit  his  grandparents  in  Bear 
Lake  Valley.  Being  naturally  very 
active,  he  enjoyed  life  on  the  farm  and 
insisted  upon  remaining  there  and 
found  work  herding  cows  in  the  sum- 
mer and  feeding  stock  in  the  winter. 
While  there,  with  the  consent  of  his 
father,  he  was  baptized  and  confirmed 
a  member  of  the  Church.  Upon  his 
return  to  Salt  Lake  City,  two  or  three 
years  later,  he  attended  Karl  G.  Mae- 
ser's  school  for  a  short  time,  but  not 
being  happy  there  he  presented  him- 
self at  Miss  Cook's  school  in  the  Social 
Hall,  where  he  earned  his  tuition  by 
doing  janitor  work  and  gardening  for 
Miss  Cook  in  the  summer.  Later  he 
attended  the  University  of  Utah  for  a 


204 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


short  time.  Like  most  boys  he  took 
a  great  interest  in  the  Fire  Brigade 
and  served  as  the  "mascot"  of  the 
Veteran  Firemen's  Association  in  his 
boyhood  and  was  later  given  an  hon- 
orary life  membership  in  that  organ- 
ization. After  working  in  a  black- 
smith's shop  for  a  time  he  became 
associated  with  Charles  R.  Savage  the 
pioneer  photographer,  where  his  sister 
Jane  also  worked,  which  gave  him 
great  joy.  After  ten  years  of  service 
there  he  became  associated  with  the 
S.  R.  Marks  Furniture  Company,  and 
still  later  was  a  clerk  and  salesman 
for  Dinwoodey  Furniture  Co.  The 
death  of  Nathan  Sears  of  the  Sears 
Glass  and  Paint  Company  in  1896,  was 
a  great  sorrow  to  Bx'o.  Bennett  as  they 
had  been  close  friends.  Shortly  after- 
wards he  assumed  the  management  of 
the  business  in  behalf  of  the  family 
of  Bro.  Sears  and  a  new  company  was 
organized  of  which  he  became  presi- 
dent. In  due  time  he  purchased  the 
Sears  interest  and  continued  the  busi- 
ness as  the  Bennett  Glass  and  Paint 
Company. 

On  Nov.  17,  1897,  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,  he  married  Rosetta  E.  Wal- 
lace, daughter  of  Henry  and  Ellen  Har- 
per Wallace  of  Salt  Lake  City.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  five 
children,  three  sons  (Wallace  F.,  Har- 
old H.  and  Richard  S.)  and  two  daugh- 
ters (Elizabeth,  wife  of  Elwood  G. 
Winter,  and  Mary,  wife  of  Kenneth 
E.  Smith). 

Bro.  Bennett  has  always  been  deep- 
ly interested  in  Sunday  School  woi-k 
and  presided  over  the  Sunday  school 
of  the  20th  Ward  for  some  years.  Since 
1897  he  has  been  a  member  of  the  Des- 
eret  Sunday  School  Union  Board  and 
since  1908  has  been  general  treasurer 
of  that  organization,  and  in  addition 
is  at  present  a  member  of  the  Church 
Auditing  Committee.  He  is  also  a 
director  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  Zion's  Savings 
Bank,  Utah  State  National  Bank,  Des- 
eret  Book  Company,  Home  Pjre  In- 
surance     Company,      Zion's      Benefit 


Building  Society,  Utah  Oil  Refining 
Company,  Consolidated  Wagon  Co., 
and  many  organizations  away  from 
his  home  town. 

BENNION,  Adam  Samuel,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Des- 
ei-et  Sunday  School  Union  since  1915, 
was  born  Dec.  2,  1886,  at  Taylorsville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  Bushell  Ben- 
nion  and  Mary  Ann  Sharp.  He  was 
educated  in  the  primary  a^^d  secondary 
schools  in  Salt  Lake  City,  obtained  the 
degree  of  B.  A.  at  the  University  of 
Utah  in  1908,  the  degree  of  M.  A.,  at 
the  Columbia  University,  N.  Y.,  in 
1912,  and  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  at  Ber- 
keley, Calif.,  in  1923.  Bro.  Bennion 
was  baptized  when  he  was  eight  years 
old  and  after  functioning  in  offices  of 
the  Aaronic  Priesthood,  he  was  or- 
dained an  Elder.  On  Oct.  27,  1910, 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  J.  Gold- 
en Kimball  and  became  a  member  of 
the  115th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  From 
1904  to  1907  he  was  a  member  of  the 
superintendency  of  the  Tayloi'sville 
Sunday  school  and  teacher  in  the  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  From  1907  to  1911  he 
served  in  the  superintendency  of  the 
Granite  Stake  Sunday  school  board, 
and  in  1915  became  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union.  In  1919  he  was  ap- 
})ointed  a  member  of  the  general  board 
of  Religion  Classes,  and  in  June,  1919, 
he  was  appointed  superintendent  of  the 
Latter-day  Saint  schools,  which  posi- 
tion he  held  until  1927,  when  he  be- 
came an  official  of  the  Utah  Light 
and  Power  Company.  On  Sept.  14, 
1911,  he  married  Minerva  Richards 
Young,  daughter  of  Gen.  Richard  W. 
Young  and  Minerva  Richards.  Five 
children  have  blessed  this  marriage, 
namely,  Phyllis,  .Adam,  Richard,  Mar- 
ian and  Edmund. 

^  BENNION,  M.  Lynn  (Milton  Lind- 
say) a  member  of  the  General  Board 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union, 
was  born  Oct.  2,  1902,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Milton  Bennion 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


206 


and  Cora  Lindsay.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  30,  1910,  by  George  C.  Osguthorpe, 
ordained  a  Deacon  July  12,  1914,  by 
James  Henry,  a  Teacher  Jan.  28,  1918, 
by  Eugene  M.  Cannon  and  a  Priest 
Jan.   11,   1920,  by   Ellas   S.    Woodruff. 


He  was  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  2,  1921, 
by  William  M.  Hunter,  and  a  High 
Priest  July  15,  1934,  by  Apostle 
George  Albert  Smith.  From  1920  to 
1923,  Elder  Bennion  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Central  States,  presiding  over 
the  Southwest  Missouri  Conference 
part  of  the  time.  After  his  return 
from  this  mission  he  continued  his 
education  at  the  University  of  Utah, 
graduating  in  1926.  From  1925  to 
1926,  he  presided  over  the  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  of  the  Forest  Dale  Ward.  From 
1926  to  1927  he  taught  in  the  L.  D.  S. 
Seminary  in  Kamas,  Utah,  and  served 
during  that  year  on  the  South  Sum- 
mit Stake  Sunday  School  Board.  The 
following  two  years  were  spent  teach- 
ing in  the  L.  D.  S.  Seminary  at  Rich- 
mond, Utah,  and  serving  on  the  Ben- 
son Stake  Sunday  School  Board.  He 
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  East 
Jordan  Stake  High  Council,  July  15, 
1934,  and  of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  board  in  November,  1934.  He 
took  a  master's  degree  in  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah  in  1931,  and  in  1934  he 


received  a  doctor's  degree  in  the  field 
of  education  from  the  University  of 
California,  and  was  appointed  super- 
visor of  the  L.  D.  S.  senior  seminaries 
in  November,  1935.  He  is  also  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Phi  Delta  Kappa  (a  national 
educational  fraternity)  and  of  the  Sig- 
ma Chi  (a  national  social  fraternity). 
On  Sept.  18,  1928,  Dr.  Bennion  mar- 
ried Katherine  Snow,  daughter  of 
Warren  C.  Snow  and  Kate  Crawford; 
this  union  has  been  blessed  with  two 
daughters,  namely,  Katherine  Annette, 
born  Sept.  18,  1928,  and  Coralyn  E., 
born  Feb.  9,  1932. 

BENNION,  Milton,  First  Assistant 
in  the  General  Superintendency  of  the 
L.  D.  S.  Sunday  Schools,  was  born  at 


Taylorsville,  Utah,  June  7,  1870,  a  son 
of  John  Bennion  and  Mary  Turpin. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1878,  by 
Archibald  Frame,  was  ordained  to  the 
office  of  a  Deacon  at  the  age  of  12 
years,  a  Teacher  at  15,  and  a  Priest  at 
18  years  of  age.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Nov.  8,  1889,  by  William  Ben- 
nion, and  a  Seventy  Nov.  11,  1889,  by 
Apostle  John  Henry  Smith,  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  New  Zealand. 
While  on  this  mission  Elder  Bennion 
labored  most  of  the  time  in  the  Whan- 
garei  District,  over  which  he  presided 


206 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


in  an  efficient  manner  until  the  close 
of  the  year  1892,  when  he  returned 
home.  The  journey  from  Salt  Lake 
to  New  Zealand  had  been  across  the 
Pacific  Ocean.  The  return  journey 
was  made  via  Australia,  Ceylon, 
Egypt,  Palestine  and  various  parts  of 
Europe;  thus  he  circumnavigated  the 
globe.  Being  one  of  the  leading  edu- 
cators of  the  state,  he  is  deeply  in- 
terested in  Sunday  School  work  and 
became  a  member  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day School  Union  Board  in  1909,  and 
upon  the  reorganization  of  the  general 
superintendency  Oct.  30,  1934,  was  se- 
lected as  First  Assistant  to  Supt. 
George  D.  Pyper. 

Elder  Bennion  acted  as  principal  of 
the  Southern  Branch  of  the  Utah 
State  Normal  School  at  Cedar  Cit.\- 
from  1897  to  1900,  was  a  member  of 
the  Utah  State  Board  of  Education 
from  1898  to  1900,  an  assistant  pro- 
fessor in  the  University  of  Utah  in 
1901-1904,  and  professor  of  philosophy 
at  the  same  institution  from  1904  to 
1913.  Since  1913  he  has  been  Dean 
of  the  School  of  Education  and  pro- 
fessor of  philosophy  and  education 
since  1914,  and  director  of  the  sum- 
mer sessions  in  the  University.  He 
received  the  degree  of  B.  S.  from  the 
University  of  Utah  in  1897;  M.  A.  from 
Columbia  University  in  1901,  and  the 
honorary  degree  of  Ed.  D.  from  the 
University  of  Utah  in  1931.  He  acted 
as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  char- 
acter education  of  the  National  Coun- 
cil of  Education  and  of  the  National 
Education  Association  from  1920  to 
1926,  has  been  a  member  of  the  Na- 
tional Council  of  Education  since  1915 
and  is  a  fellow  in  the  American  Asso- 
ciation for  the  advancement  of  science. 

On  June  22,  1898,  Elder  Bennion 
married  Cora  Lindsay  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  To  them  have  been  born  the 
following  sons  and  daughters:  Claire 
(Mrs.  Wm.  L.  Jones),  Maurine  (Mrs. 
E.  L.  Folsom),  Milton  Lindsay  (M. 
Lynn),  Wayne  L.,  Lowell  L.,  Ruth, 
Grant  Madson,  Frances,  Margaret  and 


Vaughan  L.  Ruth  and  Margaret  died 
in  infancy.  All  the  others,  except 
Vaughn,  are  now  adults  and  graduates 
of  the  University  of  Utah. 

CANNON,  (ieorge  M.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day School  Union  since  1901,  and  a 
son  of  Angus  Munn  Cannon  and  Sarah 
Maria   Mousley   Cannon,  was  born  at 


St.  George,  Washington  Co.,  Utah, 
Christmas  morning  1861.  There  being- 
no  house  in  the  town,  he  was  born  in 
a  covered  wagon,  the  box  of  which  had 
been  lifted  from  the  running  gears 
and  set  upon  supports,  which  raised 
the  bed  a  few  inches  above  the  ground. 
The  family  was  recalled  from  the 
Dixie  Mission  and  returned  to  Salt 
Lake  City  in  the  spring  of  1869. 

George  M.  was  baptized  by  George 
Q.  Cannon  on  his  eighth  birthday, 
Dec.  25,  1869,  became  a  member  of 
the  14th  Ward,  and  there  received  suc- 
cessively ordination  to  the  office  of 
Deacon,  Teacher,  Priest,  and  Elder, 
the  latter  oi'dination  was  under  the 
hands  of  the  presidency  of  the  Ist 
quorum  of  Elders,  Edward  W.  Davis, 
John  W.  Taylor  and  Matthias  F.  Cow- 
ley. Later  George  M.  Cannon  became 
president  of  the  First  Quorum  of  El- 
ders, and  as  such  had  charge  of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


207 


furnishing  of  the  Elders'  room  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple  at  the  time  of  its 
dedication  in  1893.  He  continued  in 
that  position  until  the  organization  of 
the  Granite  Stake,  when  on  January 
28, 1900,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  sustained 
as  stake  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools.  In  November,  1900,  he  be- 
came a  member  of  the  general  board 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union. 
In  business  George  M.  Cannon  ha.s 
been  active  from  early  youth.  He  was 
bookkeeper  and  collector  for  his  fa- 
ther in  the  coal  business  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  selling  coal  from  the  old  "Grass 
Creek  Coal  Mines"  (near  Coalville); 
engaged  in  the  real  estate  business 
with  his  brother  John  M.  Cannon  from 
1886  to  1891.  On  January  1,  1891, 
he  became  cashier  of  Zion's  Savings 
Bank  and  Trust  Co.,  a  position  held 
until  Sept.  30,  1906,  at  which  time  he 
retired,  and  has  engaged  in  private 
business  since  that  date.  He  had  ac- 
tive connection  with  mutual  building 
societies  of  Utah;  was  a  charter  mem- 
ber of  Zion's  Benefit  Building  Society; 
organized  the  Deseret  Building  Soci- 
ety, the  final  draft  for  which  was 
dx-awn  by  himself,  Richard  W.  Young 
and  Philip  Maycock.  He  is  now  presi- 
dent and  manager  of  the  Prudential 
Federal  Savings  and  Loan  Association. 
In  1907,  with  greater  opportunity  for 
private  wox'k,  he  planted  Rosedale 
Orchard,  probably  the  most  noted 
cherry  orchard  in  Utah,  which  is  still 
being  enlarged  and  improved  year  by 
year. 

In  political  circles  George  M.  Can- 
non has  had  great  experience  and  is 
widely  known.  He  was  in  1884  elected 
county  recorder  of  Salt  Lake  County 
and  held  that  position  for  six  years. 
He  studied  the  best  methods  of  show- 
ing titles  to  real  estate,  and  in  1888 
copyrighted  Cannon's  System  of  Ab- 
stracts. This  he  gave  to  Salt  Lake 
County  upon  retirement  from  office  in 
1890,  and  the  system  is  still  in  use 
after  more  than  forty-five  years;  and 


has  been  copied  in  many  other  coun- 
ties of  Utah. 

Elder  Cannon  was  elected  to  the 
Constitutional  convention  in  1895,  and 
was  chairman  of  two  of  its  commit- 
tees; one  on  taxation;  the  other  on 
public  debt.  In  1895  he  became  chair- 
man of  the  Republican  State  Commit- 
tee, and  had  charge  of  the  campaign 
which  ratified  the  State  Constitution, 
and  elected  to  state  office  every  man 
on  the  Republican  ticket.  Utah  be- 
came a  state  on  Jan.  4,  1896,  and  Mr. 
Cannon  became  the  first  president  of 
the  State  Senate  of  Utah.  (See  also 
Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  1,  p.  566.) 

CANNON,  Tracy  Y.,  Bishop  of  the 
Cannon  Ward  and  member  of  the  gen- 
eral board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union  and  of  the  general  music 
committee   of   the    Church,   was    born 


July  23,  1879,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  George  Q.  Cannon  and  Caro- 
line Young.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  2, 
1887,  by  Joseph  Keddington  and  or- 
dained a  Deacon;  ordained  a  Teacher 
Feb.  29,  1896,  by  George  Q.  Cannon, 
and  a  Priest  Nov.  19,  1897,  by  Cyrus 
H.  Gold.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Sept.  12,  1898,  by  Angus  M.  Cannon,  a 
Seventy  June  25,  1901,  by  J.  Golden 
Kimball,  and  a  High  Priest  in  Novem- 


208 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ber,  1915,  by  Wm.  McLachlan.  He 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Pioneer 
Stake  High  Council  from  November, 
1915,  to  May  15,  1927,  and  became  a 
member  of  the  General  Sunday  School 
Board,  June  8,  1917,  being  set  apart  to 
that  position  by  Pi'es.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 
After  being  ordained  a  Bishop,  Dec. 
14,  1930,  by  Apostle  George  Albert 
Smith,  he  presided  over  the  Cannon 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
Feb.  23,  1936,  when  he  was  released 
on  account  of  his  many  duties  con- 
nected with  music  in  the  Church. 
Bishop  Cannon  was  sustained  as  as- 
sistant tabernacle  organist  in  April, 
1909,  and  later  became  organist;  was 
a  member  of  the  Centennial  Commit- 
tee in  1930,  and  played  the  organ  for 
the  great  pageant  in  that  year.  He 
has  been  director  of  the  McCune 
School  of  Music  since  June  11,  1925, 
for  which  position  his  training  has 
adequately  fitted  him.  He  was  edu- 
cated in  the  public  schools  of  Salt  Lake 
City  and  at  the  University  of  Utah. 
Later  he  studied  piano  with  Alberto 
Jonas  in  Berlin,  and  organ  with  Al- 
bert A.  Stanley  in  Ann  Arbor,  Michi- 
gan, with  Alexandre  Guilmant  in  Par- 
is, and  with  Pietro  A.  Yon  in  New 
York;  harmony  and  counterpoint  with 
Dr.  Stanley;  harmony,  counterpoint, 
fugue  and  composition  with  Walter 
Meyerowitz  of  Berlin,  and  orchestra- 
tion with  Albei-t  Rousell  in  Paris.  He 
received  an  honox-ary  degree  of  Master 
of  Music  from  the  Chicago  Musical 
College,  June  18,  1930,  and  has  been 
active  as  a  teacher  of  piano,  organ  and 
composition,  over  a  thousand  students 
having  come  under  his  tutelage.  He 
has  written  a  number  of  songs  and 
hymns,  and  was  one  of  the  editors  of 
the  L.  D.  S.  hymn  book,  edition  of 
1927. 

On  Sept.  12,  1905,  Elder  Cannon 
married  Elsie  Priscilla  Jennings  Ri- 
ter,  who  was  born  Feb.  6,  1884,  and 
died  at  Manheim,  Germany,  May  27, 
1907.  On  April  26,  1911,  he  married 
Lettie  Taylor,  who  was  born  in  Ogden, 


Utah,  Aug.  24,  1889,  and  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  May  4,  1935.  The  follow- 
ing children  were  born  to  Tracy  Y. 
Cannon  and  Lettie  T.  Cannon:  Tracy 
Taylor,  born  Feb.  10,  1912;  Melvin 
Croxall,  born  July  25,  1913;  Ralph 
Taylor,  born  April  22,  1914;  Judith, 
born  Sept.  20,  1916;  Frances,  born  May 
18,  1919;  Rose  Ann,  born  Jan.  3,  1923, 
and  Emerson  Taylor,  born  March  6, 
1926. 

CUMMINGS,  Horace  Hall,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Deser- 
et  Sunday  School  Union  since  1901, 
was  born  June  12,  1858,  at  Provo, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Benjamin  Franklin 
Cummings   and    Catherine   Hall.      He 


-^  »  '^^' 


-^^ 


was  baptized  Dec.  7,  1866,  by  Edward 
Stevenson,  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  20, 
1874,  by  his  father  (B.  F.  Cummings), 
ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  2,  1884,  by 
Thomas  V.  Williams,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest,  Jan.  28,  1900,  by  Anthon 
H.  Lund.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Mexi- 
co in  1885-1887,  presiding  over  the 
Mexican  Mission  during  the  last  year. 
While  on  this  mission  he  distributed 
the  first  shipment  of  Books  of  Mor- 
mon in  Spanish,  shipped  the  first  com- 
pany of  42  Mexicans  to  the  L.  D.  S. 
colonies  in  Chihuahua,  translated  and 
printed  in  Spanish  a  number  of  sec- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENYLOPEDIA 


209 


tions  from  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants 
and  compiled  the  first  complete  mission 
record  in  Mexico. 

Elder  Cummings  worked  as  a  chore 
boy  for  two  years  at  $10  per  month 
and  his  boaz-d,  then,  for  one  year,  at 
the  Deseret  News  office  for  |5.00  per 
week;  then  for  three  years  in  a  woolen 
factory  at  $9.00  per  week,  giving  all 
he  earned  to  his  parents.  After  taking 
a  B.  S.  degree  in  1895,  in  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah,  he  took  further  work  in 
the  Chicago  University  and  the  Co- 
lumbia University,  and  added  to  his 
store  of  knowledge  by  reading  and 
study,  so  that  he  became  one  of  the 
foremost  educators  in  the  State  of 
Utah.  Thus,  he  taught  for  six  years 
in  the  public  schools,  five  years  in  the 
Church  schools  and  eleven  years  in  the 
University  of  Utah.  He  served  over 
thirteen  years  as  general  superinten- 
dent of  the  L.  D.  S.  schools.  While 
serving  as  a  member  of  the  third  Utah 
State  Legislature,  he  introduced  a  bill 
which  moved  the  University  of  Utah 
from  its  location  on  2nd  West  street 
to  the  commodious  site  on  the  east 
bench. 

Bro.  Cummings  had  charge  of  the 
Utah  Educational  Exhibit  at  the 
World's  Fair  at  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in 
1904,  and  won  for  the  exhibit  gold 
and  silver  medals  and  about  20  lesser 
ones.  He  was  also  chosen  to  represent 
the  National  Educational  Association 
at  the  Mexican  Centennial  celebration 
on  invitation  of  Pres.  Porfiro  Diaz,  at 
the  expense  of  the  Mexican  govern- 
ment. 

By  request  of  the  Utah  State  Text 
Book  Commission,  Bi'O.  Cummings 
wrote  three  school  books  on  elemen- 
tary science,  which  i-eceived  three 
adoptions  of  five  years  each,  and  now 
after  35  years,  without  revision,  are 
still  used  in  many  schools,  and  secure 
for  the  writer  a  nice  little  check  an- 
nually as  royalty  on  sales.  He  has 
also  done  his  share  in  the  civic  devel- 
opment of  Salt  Lake  City  by  building, 
at  different  times,  two  homes  for  his 


mother,  two  for  himself,  a  store  at  44 
East  South  Temple  street,  three  apart- 
ment houses  on  2nd  South  street,  and 
four  houses  in  Gilmer  Park,  costing 
in  all,  including  the  land,  about  $300,- 
000.  In  ward  and  stake  capacities  he 
has  also  been  a  faithful  and  zealous 
worker.  Among  other  offices  he 
served  as  a  Sunday  school  teacher  for 
over  25  years,  president  in  the  61st 
Quorum  of  Seventy,  stake  superinten- 
dent of  religion  classes,  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  Granite  Stake, 
member  of  the  central  committee 
which  started  the  M.  I.  Associations, 
general  superintendent  of  L.  D.  S. 
schools,  and  a  member  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union  Board  since 
1901. 

In  1881,  Elder  Cummings  married 
Bai-bara  M.  Moses.  This  union  has 
been  blessed  with  six  sons  and  two 
daughters,  namely,  Horace  Moses,  Ju- 
lian Moses,  William  Ridge,  Victor 
Clyde,  Lorenzo  John  and  Harold  Mo- 
ses, and  Ruby  and  Norma.  He  also 
married  Matilda  Wilcox  Bliss,  a  wid- 
ow with  three  children  (Ella  Maud, 
Edwin  Samuel  and  Walter  Bliss); 
one  child,  a  daughter  who  died  two 
days  after  birth,  was  born  of  this 
marriage. 

DE  JONG,  Gerrit,  jun.,  member  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day School  Union,  and  of  the  Church 
Music  Committee,  was  born  March  20, 
1892,  at  Amsterdam,  Holland,  a  son  of 
Gerrit  de  Jong  and  Lijda  Marianna 
Kuiper.  With  his  parents  and  an  only 
sister,  he  emigrated  to  America  in 
1906,  crossing  the  Atlantic  Ocean  in 
the  ship  "Potsdam"  of  the  Holland- 
America  Line,  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  July  28,  1906.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  1,  1907,  by  John  B.  Fehr  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Tabernacle,  and  ordained  a 
Priest  Feb.  24,  1908,  by  John  K. 
White.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  Aug. 
22,  1911,  by  Robert  B.  T.  Taylor;  a 
Seventy  Nov.  27,  1912,  by  J.  Golden 
Kimball,  and  a  High  Priest  Feb  5, 
1928,    by    Wm.    A.    McCullough.     Al- 


Vol.   IV.   No.   14 


April  4,  1936 


210 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


though  only  14  years  of  age  when  he 
arrived  in  Utah,  young  Gerrit  not 
only  spoke  his  native  language 
(Dutch),  but  English,  German  and 
French,  and  since  that  time  has  be- 
come   proficient    in    the    Spanish    lan- 


guage. For  some  time  he  attended  the 
Murdock  Academy  in  Beaver,  Utah, 
and  the  L.  D.  S.  University  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  received  an  A.  B.  de- 
gree from  the  University  of  Utah  in 
December,  1920,  and  a  M.  A.  degree 
from  the  same  institution  in  June, 
1925.  He  studied  at  the  National  Uni- 
versity of  Mexico  in  1921,  and  at  the 
University  of  Munich,  Germany,  in 
1927.  He  attended  the  Leland  Stan- 
ford Junior  University  in  California, 
from  June,  1931,  to  October,  1932, 
where  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph. 
D.  in  June,  1933,  having  specialized  in 
Germanic  and  Romanic  languages  and 
literatures.  He  perhaps  holds  a  rec- 
ord in  the  Church  for  having  preached 
the  gospel  in  different  parts  of  the 
world  in  five  different  languages.  Be- 
ginning the  study  of  music  in  Holland 
at  11  years  of  age,  he  specialized  in 
piano  and  organ,  and  has  since  devel- 
oped a  fine  reputation  as  a  choral  and 
orchestral  director  and  composer.  Af- 
ter teaching  music  privately  in  Salt 
Lake  City  until   1916,  he   became  an 


instructor  at  the  Murdock  Academy 
at  Beaver,  and  taught  there  in  1916- 
1918.  He  was  instructor  of  modern 
languages  at  the  L.  D.  S.  University 
of  Salt  Lake  City  from  1919  to  1925, 
since  which  time  he  has  acted  as  pro- 
fessor of  modern  languages  and  dean 
of  the  College  of  Fine  Arts  at  the  Brig- 
ham  Young  University  at  Provo,  Utah. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  general  board 
of  Religion  Classes  until  that  organ- 
ization was  discontinued,  became  a 
member  of  the  Utah  Stake  High  Coun- 
cil in  1933  and  of  the  general  board 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  and  of 
the  Church  Music  Committee  in  1934. 
On  Sept.  14,  1911,  Bro  De  Jong  mar- 
ried Rosabelle  Winegar  of  Salt  Lake 
City  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  Pres. 
Joseph  F.  Smith  officiating.  Four  chil- 
dren have  blessed  this  union,  namely, 
Wm.  Gerritt,  born  in  1913;  Belle  Felice, 
born  in  1919;  Nola  Eloise,  born  in  1924, 
and  Carma  Rose,  born  in  1930. 

DRIGGS,  Howard  Roscoe,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Des- 
eret Sunday  School  Union,  and  of  the 


High  Council  of  the  New  York  Stake 
of  Zion,  was  born  Aug.  8,  1873,  at 
Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ben- 
jamin W.  Driggs  and  Rosalia  Ellen 
Cox.     Being  born  of  Latter-day  Saint 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


211 


parents,  he  was  baptized  when  he  was 
eight  years  old  and  after  officiating 
for  some  time  in  the  Aaronic  Priest- 
hood was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1897 
at  Pleasant  Grove.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  Sept.  26,  1906,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young,  and  a  High  Priest  Dec.  9, 
1934,  by  J.  Reuben  Clark.  When  only 
14  years  of  age  he  acted  as  assistant 
secretary  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  Pleas- 
ant Grove,  served  as  secretary  of  that 
organization  in  1887-1890,  and  as 
president  from  1890  to  1891.  Bro. 
Driggs  also  served  as  assistant  super- 
intendent of  the  Pleasant  Grove  Sun- 
day school  from  1892  to  1895,  and  in- 
structor in  the  Sunday  school  for  train- 
ing teachers  (Cedar  City)  about  1898. 
He  taught  the  parents'  class  in  the 
11th  Ward  Sunday  school,  Salt  Lake 
City,  from  1907  to  1908,  was  supervi- 
sor of  parents'  classes  in  the  Ensign 
Stake  from  1908  to  1910,  and  has  been 
a  member  of  the  general  Sunday 
School  Board  since  1910.  While  re- 
siding in  New  York  City  he  organized 
elementary  and  primary  departments 
in  the  Sunday  schools  there  in  1919, 
and  assisted  Apostle  Reed  Smoot  in 
organizing  the  first  L.  D.  S.  Sunday 
school  in  Washington,  D.  C,  about 
1934.  He  acted  as  counselor  to  the 
president  of  the  New  York  Branch  of 
the  Church  from  1928  to  1930,  and  pre- 
sided over  that  branch  from  1928  to 
about  1930. 

Bro.  Driggs  was  graduated  from  the 
Brigham  Young  University  in  1892, 
from  the  University  of  Utah  in  1907 
with  the  degree  of  A.  B.  and  from  the 
same  institution  in  1918  with  the  de- 
gree of  M.  A.  In  1926  he  received  the 
degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the  New  York 
University.  While  a  student  at  the 
University  of  Chicago  in  1906,  he  won 
a  scholarship  in  the  Interstate  Univer- 
sity Oratorical  Contest. 

He  now  ranks  as  one  of  the  most 
able  teachers  the  State  of  Utah  has 
produced.  He  commenced  his  career 
as  a  teacher  in  an  ungraded  school  in 
Pleasant  Grove  (Manila)  in  1891,  was 


principal  of  the  Lindon  School  in  1894, 
instructor  of  English  in  the  Branch 
Normal  School  in  Cedar  City,  Utah, 
from  1897  to  1900,  and  assistant  prin- 
cipal of  the  same  school  from  1904  to 
1906;  instructor  of  English  at  the  U. 
of  U.  from  1912  to  1914,  professor  of 
English  education  in  the  same  institu- 
tion from  1914  to  1923;  visiting  pro- 
fessor of  English  Education  in  the 
New  York  University,  1923;  associate 
professor  of  English  education  in  the 
New  York  University  from  1924  to 
1926,  and  professor  of  English  Edu- 
cation in  the  New  York  University 
since  1928.  During  the  years  1918- 
1922,  being  on  leave  of  absence  from 
the  University  of  Utah,  he  studied 
English  teaching  over  the  United 
States. 

Dr.  Driggs  was  president  of  the 
Utah  Library  Gymnasium  Commission 
from  about  1908  to  1911,  executive  sec- 
retary of  the  Utah  State  Board  of 
Education  in  charge  of  libraries  from 
1915  to  1916;  president  of  the  Utah 
Education  Association  in  1916,  mem- 
ber of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
same  from  1917  to  1920,  and  vice  pres- 
ident of  the  National  Education  As- 
sociation from  1919  to  1920.  He  is  a 
life  member  of  the  latter  association, 
and  was  vice  president  of  the  New 
York  City  Teachers'  Club  from  1931 
to  1932.  He  also  helped  to  organize 
and  became  a  charter  member  of  the 
Utah  Trails  and  Landmarks  Associa- 
tion in  1931,  has  been  president  of  the 
Oregon  Trail  Memorial  Association 
from  1927  to  the  present  (1936),  and 
originated  and  directed  the  Covered 
Wagon  Centennial  in  1930,  and  the 
Pony  Express  Diamond  Jubilee  in  1935. 
The  office  of  the  Oregon  Trail  Asso- 
ciation is  in  New  York  City. 

Dr.  Driggs  is  proud  of  his  pioneer 
ancestry  and  is  a  staunch  represen- 
tative of  the  Church  and  of  his  native 
state  wherever  he  may  be.  On  Sept. 
8,  1897,  he  married  Eva  May  Framp- 
ton,  daughter  of  William  M.  Framp- 
ton  and  Mary  Terry.     This  union  has 


212 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


been  blessed  with  two  children,  name- 
ly, Howard  Wayne,  and  Harold  Perry. 

DURHAM,  George  Henry,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Des- 
eret  Sunday  School  Union  since  1930, 
was  born  Sept.  12,  1883,  at  Parowan, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas   Durham  and 


Caroline  Mortcnsen.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  13,  1891,  by  David  Matheson, 
sen.,  functioned  in  the  offices  of  the 
Aaronic  Priesthood,  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  later  a  Seventy  and  acted 
as  a  president  of  the  G9th  Quorum  of 
Seventy,  and  is  at  present  a  president 
of  the  157th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  Al- 
ways of  a  musical  temperament,  from 
his  early  youth  he  gave  sei'vice  to  the 
Church  in  a  musical  capacity.  After 
graduating  from  the  Murdock  Acad- 
emy at  Beaver,  Utah,  he  took  special 
courses  with  John  J.  McClellan,  Tracy 
Y.  Cannon  and  Hugh  Dougall,  after 
which  he  taught  music  in  Utah  and 
Idaho.  From  1913  to  1918,  he  studied 
music  in  Boston,  Mass.,  during  which 
time  he  acted  as  superintendent  of  the 
Boston  Branch  Sunday  school  for  three 
years  and  as  musical  director  in  the 
branch  for  five  years.  He  spent  two 
summers  at  the  Joseph  Smith  Memor- 
ial Farm,  South  Royalton,  Vermont, 
entertaining     tourists     with     musical 


progi-ams.  In  1918,  he  returned  to 
Utah,  taught  music  at  the  Murdock 
Academy,  Beaver,  acted  as  music  su- 
pervisor of  the  Beaver  City  schools 
and  later  became  music  supervisor  of 
the  Iron  County  schools.  In  1921  he 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  be- 
came music  director  at  the  South  Jun- 
ior High  School,  chorister  for  the  En- 
sign Stake  Sunday  School  Board,  and 
from  1922  to  1931,  he  was  music  su- 
pervisor at  the  L.  D.  S.  College.  Since 
1930  he  has  been  one  of  the  music 
personnel  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union  Board.  From  1935  to 
1936  he  had  leave  of  absence  and  at- 
tended the  University  of  Southern 
California. 

On  June  10,  1909,  Elder  Durham 
married  Mary  Ellen  Marsden  of  Paro- 
wan, in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple;  from 
this  union  six  sons  and  two  daughters 
have  been  born,  namely,  George  Ho- 
mer, Wilby  Marsden,  Lowell  Marsden, 
Lucius  Marsden,  Thomas  LaMar, 
Wayne  Cole,  Jean  Marie  and  Joyce 
Elaine. 

FELT,  (Anne)  Marie  Fox,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Des- 
eret Sunday  School  Union,  since  1930, 
was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  July 
24,  1900,  a  daughter  of  Jesse  M.  Fox 
and  Hanne  Sorena  Neve.  She  was 
baptized  Aug.  1,  1908,  by  Horace  T. 
Godfrey,  and  from  her  earliest  youth 
took  an  active  part  in  the  organiza- 
tions of  the  Church.  After  attending 
the  public  schools  she  studied  at  the 
University  of  Utah,  majoring  in  kin- 
dergarten and  primary  work,  and  re- 
ceived a  diploma  as  an  instructor  in 
these  branches,  which  led  to  her  ap- 
pointment in  1927  as  president  of  the 
Utah  State  Kindergarten-Primary  As- 
sociation (Utah  Branch  of  the  Inter- 
national Association  for  Childhood 
Education),  a  position  which  she  held 
until  1931.  She  taught  in  the  Salt 
Lake  City  schools  from  1919  to  1931, 
and  acted  as  demonstration  teacher  in 
the   kindergarten   department   of    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


213 


University  of  Utah  during  the  sum- 
mer of  1926. 

Sister  Felt  was  a  member  of  the 
Granite  Stake  Sunday  School  Board 
from  1919  to  1924,  and  of  the  Grant 
Stake  Sunday  School  Board  from  1924 
to  1928.  From  1930  to  1934,  she  served 
as  an  associate  member  of  the  Des- 
eret  Sunday  School  Union  Board  and 
became  a  regular  member  of  that  or- 
ganization in  1934. 

On  Sept.  2,  1931,  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,  she  was  married  to  Elder  Jo- 
seph Harold  Felt,  a  prominent  young 
business  man  of  the  city. 

With  such  unusual  training  along 
the  lines  of  child  education,  Sister  Felt 
is  able  to  render  exceptional  service 
to  the  Sunday  School  cause  in  the  re- 
sponsible position  to  which  she  has 
been  called. 

GLADE,  Earl  J.,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union,  was  born  Dec.  2,  1885, 
at  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  Rich- 


ard Glade  and  Annie  Louise  Norberg. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  26,  1894,  by 
James  Anderson,  served  in  various  of- 
fices of  the  Aaronic   Priesthood,  and 


was  ordained  an  Elder  July  24,  1909, 
by  Frederick  Rasband.  On  Aug.  16, 
1904,  he  was  set  apart  for  a  mission 
to  Switzerland  and  Germany,  laboring 
principally  in  the  Breslau  Conference 
(Germany)  of  which  he  was  president. 
He  returned  from  this  mission  in  July, 
1907.  On  Sept.  11,  1907,  Bro.  Glade 
married  Sarah  Elizabeth  Rasband, 
daughter  of  Frederick  Rasband  and 
Mary  E.  Hawkins.  Seven  children 
have  blessed  this  marriage,  namely, 
Melba,  Melva,  Earl,  jun.,  Frederick, 
Richard,  Keith  and  Patricia. 

Elder  Glade  was  graduated  from  the 
Brigham  Young  University  at  Provo, 
Utah,  where  he  was  head  of  the  do 
paitment  of  business  education  for  five 
years.  On  moving  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
he  became  affiliated  with  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah  as  professor  of  business 
for  fourteen  years.  His  main  achieve- 
ment, however,  is  in  the  radio  broad- 
casting industry.  As  managing  di- 
rector of  Radio  station  KSL,  he  is  rec- 
ognized as  Utah's  radio  pioneer. 
Through  his  efforts,  Utah  is  widely 
recognized  as  a  radio  broadcasting 
center.  Through  his  efforts  also,  the 
Salt  Lake  Tabernacle  choir  and  organ 
have  been  broadcast  from  coast  to 
coast  once  each  week  upwards  of  seven 
years. 

HILL,  Geo.  R.,  second  assistant  in 
the  general  superintendency  of  the  L. 
D.  S.  Sunday  schools,  was  born  April 
10,  1884,  at  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of 
George  Richard  Hill  and  Elizabeth 
Nancy  Burch.  His  grandparents  on 
both  sides  were  pioneers  of  Utah  and 
settled  in  Ogden  in  1848.  In  1889  Bro. 
Geo.  R.  Hill  located  on  a  farm  at 
Springville,  Utah,  where  his  son,  Geo. 
R.,  jun.,  attended  the  public  schools 
until  his  graduation  in  1900.  He  grad- 
uated from  the  high  school  of  the  Brig- 
ham  Young  University  at  Provo  in 
1904,  received  the  degree  of  B.  S.  from 
that  university  in  1907,  obtained  the 
degree  of  B.  S.  A.  from  the  Utah  Agri- 
cultural College  in  1908  and  that  of 
Ph.  D.  at  Cornell  University  in  1912. 


214 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Bro.  Hill  was  baptized  when  about 
eig:ht  years  old  and  after  serving  in 
offices  of  the  Aaronic  Priesthood  was 
ordained  an  Elder,  and  later  a  Sev- 
enty to  become  a  member  of  the  220th 


Quorum  of  Seventy.  He  served  as  an 
officer  and  teacher  in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  and  as  a  member  of  the  general 
board  of  that  organization  from  1926 
to  1935.  In  Sunday  school  work  he 
acted  as  chorister  and  also  as  a  teach- 
er in  the  Springville  3rd  and  Logan 
5th  wards,  as  Sunday  school  superin- 
tendent in  the  Logan  5th  ward,  as 
member  of  the  Sunday  school  boards 
of  the  Salt  Lake  and  Cache  stakes,  as 
member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union  from 
1925,  devoting  much  time  to  the  prep- 
aration of  lesson  outlines,  and  in  1934 
was  set  apart  as  a  member  of  the  gen- 
eral superintendency  of  the  L.  D.  S. 
Sunday  schools. 

As  an  agriculturalist,  Bro.  Hill's  ac- 
tivities have  been  of  great  value  to  his 
native  state.  As  a  youth  he  engaged 
in  farming,  was  instructor  of  agricul- 
ture and  science  in  the  L.  D.  S.  High 
School  in  1907-1908, instructor  in  plant 
physiology  in  Cornell  University  in 
1910-1912,  was  research  assistant  in 
the  Missouri  Botanical  Garden  in  1912- 


1913,  professor  of  botany  and  plant 
pathology  at  the  U.  S.  A.  C.  at  Logan, 
Utah,  in  1913-1915,  and  dean  of  agri- 
culture at  the  U.  S.  A.  C.  in  1915-1925. 
Since  1925  he  has  been  director  of  the 
department  of  agricultural  research  at 
the  American  Smelting  and  Refining 
Company  with  headquarters  at  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
American  Association  for  the  Advance- 
ment of  Science,  of  the  Botanical  So- 
ciety of  America,  of  the  American  So- 
ciety of  Plant  Physiologists,  of  the 
Utah  Academy  of  Science  and  of  the 
Gamma  Alpha  and  Sigma  Xi. 

On  April  10,  1914,  Dr.  Hill  married 
Elizabeth  Odette  McKay,  daughter  of 
David  McKay  and  Jeanette  Evans  of 
Huntsville,  Utah.  This  marriage  was 
blessed  with  three  children,  namely, 
Elizabeth,  George  Richard  III,  and 
Jeanette  Evans  McKay  Hill.  Bro.  Hill 
has  taken  a  keen  interest  in  scouting, 
being  actively  engaged  in  these  ac- 
tivities for  the  past  twenty-one  years 
and  has  served  as  scoutmaster  of  the 
Logan  Troop  Five,  member  of  Cache 
Valley  Council,  chairman  of  the 
Oquirrh  District,  member  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Area  Council  and  vice  president 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Council.  His  philos- 
ophy of  life  is  expressed  as  follows: 
"The  man  worth  while  is  the  man  who 
can  smile,  though  everj'thing  goes 
dead  wrong,"  "I  know  that  my  Re- 
deemer lives,"  and  "There  is  beauty 
all  around  when  there's  love  at  home." 

HOLT,  George  A.,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union  since  1928,  was  born 
June  28,  1880,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  J.  Holt  and  Louise  Hill. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  30,  1888,  by 
Samuel  Smedley,  ordained  to  offices  in 
the  Aaronic  Priesthood  and  ordained 
an  Elder  Dec.  6,  1900,  by  Richard 
Stringham.  He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Oct.  29,  1901,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young,  and  a  High  Priest  somewhat 
later  by  Charles  B.  Felt.  After  serv- 
ing as  a  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


215 


Sunday  school  teacher  and  superinten- 
dent of  Sunday  schools  in  Weber  Stake, 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1901-1904,  laboring  in  Scotland,  where 
he  served  as  a  missionary  and  clerk  of 


a  district.  After  his  return  from  this 
mission  he  married  Bessie  Crosbie  of 
Ogden,  Nov.  22,  1904,  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple.  This  marriage  has  been  bless- 
ed with  nine  children,  namely,  Wil- 
liam F.,  Forrest  C,  Helen  Louise,  Gor- 
don C,  George  Albert,  jun..  Dale  C, 
Dorothy  Alice,  Bettie  Jean  and  Max- 
ine  Joan.  Three  sons  (William,  For- 
rest and  Gordon)  have  filled  honorable 
missions  to  Germany. 

As  a  boy  Bro.  Holt  attended  school 
in  Bountiful  and  the  L.  D.  S.  College 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  also  assisted  his 
father  in  farming  and  market  gar- 
dening. He  was  employed  for  a  time 
by  the  Wright  Mercantile  Company 
of  Ogden,  and  later,  becoming  asso- 
ciated with  the  O.  P.  Skaggs  Company, 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City.  This  concern 
and  the  Safeway  stores  are  subsidiar- 
ies of  the  Western  States  Grocery  Co., 
in  all  of  which  concerns  Bro.  Holt  has 
become  a  large  stockholder  and  lead- 
ing executive.  He  is  also  a  director 
of  the  Pacific  National  Life  Insur- 
ance Company,  and  of  the  KSL  Radio 
Broadcasting  Station,  and  is  a  mem- 


ber of  the  Salt  Lake  Chamber  of  Com- 
merce, and  president  of  the  Sunset 
Mausoleum  Company,  Salt  Lake  City. 

HOOPER,  Thos.  Albert,  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day School  Union  since  1920,  was  born 
May  18,  1881,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 


a  son  of  Thomas  A.  Hooper  and  Emily 
S.  Aubrey.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  1, 
1889,  by  Joseph  Keddington  and  or- 
dained to  offices  in  the  Aaronic  Priest- 
hood, being  at  one  time  president  of 
a  Deacons'  quorum  in  the  11th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  early  in  June,  1921,  by  Arthur 
W.  Brown  and  ordained  a  Seventy  June 
21,  1901,  by  B.  H.  Roberts,  on  which 
occasion  he  was  set  apart  for  a  mis- 
sion to  Germany.  After  laboring  suc- 
cessfully in  the  Konigsberg  and  Ham- 
burg conferences,  he  was  honorably 
released  in  July,  1904,  after  which  he 
visited  Switzerland,  Holland,  Belgium 
and  France.  For  two  years  after  his 
return  home  he  acted  as  organist  for 
the  Ensign  Stake.  In  a  business  capa- 
city he  became  associated  with  a  brok- 
erage firm  and  later  was  manager  of 
the  Deseret  News  job  printing  depart- 
ment. Some  time  afterwards  he  was 
appointed  manager  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day School  Union  Book  Store,  which 


216 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


was  combined  with  the  Deseret  News 
Book  Store  and  became  the  Deseret 
Book  Company  of  which  he  is  still 
(1936)   the  manager. 

In  June,  1907,  Elder  Hooper  married 
Lillie  May  Coulam  of  the  11th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City;  four  children  have  been 
born  of  this  union,  namely,  Beth, 
Eugene  A.,  Ruth  and  Gretta. 

Bro.  Hooper  moved  to  the  Granite 
Stake  and  became  stake  organist  for 
the  Sunday  Schools.  He  also  acted  as 
choir  leader  of  the  Forest  Dale  Ward 
for  eleven  years,  and  during  this  time 
was  president  of  the  ward  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  In  a  civil  capacity  Elder  Hooper  has 
been  a  member  of  the  Commercial, 
Rotary,  Kiwanis  and  Bonneville  clubs 
of  Salt  Lake  City  and  of  the  Graphic 
Arts  Association,  of  which  organiza- 
tion he  was  an  executive. 

JUDD,  Robert  L.,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union  since  1920,  a  prominent 


jurist  and  general  council  for  the 
Church,  was  born  July  6,  1885,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah.  (See  Biogi-aphical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  4,  p.  100.) 

KIMBALL,    Edward     Partridge,     a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Deseret    Sunday    School    Union   since 


1916,  was  born  June  2,  1882,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Albei't  K. 
Kimball  and  Harriet  Partridge.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old 
by  John  Keddington,  ordained  to 
offices  in  the  Aaronic  Priesthood 
and  later  ordained  an  Elder.  He 
was  educated  in  the  public  schools 
and  the  Latter-day  Saints  College  in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  the  Brigham  Young 
University  at  Provo,  after  which  he 
took  extensive  musical  training  in  Ger- 
many. On  April  11,  1902,  he  was  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  Germany  from 
which  he  returned  in  April  1906.  Later 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  in 
1928-1930  he  presided  over  the  Ger- 
man-Austrian Mission  with  headquar- 
ters in  Dresden,  Germany. 

In  1906,  Elder  Kimball  married 
Hazel  Young  Beatie,  a  daughter  of 
Walter  J.  Beatie  and  Phoebe  Young. 
Three  children  have  blessed  this  mar- 
riage, namely  Marion  Y.,  Edward  B. 
(Ted)   and  one  son  deceased. 

While  attending  the  L.  D.  S.  Col- 
lege, Bro.  Kimball  wrote  the  college 
song  "Gold  and  Blue".  Later  he  was 
music  editor  of  the  Deseret  News  for 
three  years  and  a  member  of  the 
Church  Music  Committee.  He  is  the 
author  of  some  music  text  books,  in- 
cluding the  "Choristers'  Manual."  For 
twenty-five  years  he  served  as  organist 
of  the  Tabernacle  in  Salt  Lake  City 
and  in  1933  was  called  to  act  as  organ- 
ist of  the  niagnificent  chapel  erected  by 
the  Church  in  Washington,  D.  C, 
where  he  also  operates  a  bureau  of 
information  in  connection  with  the 
chapel. 

MAW,  Herbert  Brown,  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day School  Union,  was  born  at  Ogden, 
Utah,  March  11,  1892,  a  son  of  Eph- 
raim  G.  Maw  and  Emma  Brown.  When 
young  Herbert  was  about  seven  years 
of  age  his  parents  established  residence 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  attended 
the  Hamilton,  Webster  and  Oquirrh 
schools,  graduating  from  the  latter  in 
1908.    He  studied  at  the  L.  D.  S.  High 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


217 


School  from  1908  to  1912,  and  at  the 
University  of  Utah  from  1912  to  1918 
and  from  1922  to  1923.  He  attended 
the  University  of  Wisconsin  during  the 
summer  of  1920,  and  the  Northwestei'n 


ifm  -^^ 


•^'^tif^ 


University  in  Chicago,  111.,  in  1926- 
1927.  He  obtained  the  following  de- 
grees: L.L.B.,  University  of  Utah,  in 
1916;  B.S.,  University  of  Utah,  in 
1923;  M.A.,  Northwestern  University, 
in  1926,  and  J.D.  at  the  same  Univer- 
sity in  1927.  He  was  admitted  to  the 
Utah  State  Bar  in  June,  1916,  and  has 
practiced  law  ever  since.  He  taught 
in  the  L.  D.  S.  Business  College  in 
1916-1917  and  1919-1923,  was  instruc- 
tor at  the  University  of  Utah  Depart- 
ment of  Speech  from  1923  to  1925,  was 
assistant  professor  from  1927  to  1928, 
associate  professor  from  1928  to  1931, 
professor  of  speech  from  1931  and 
dean  of  men  from  1928  to  the  present 
time  (1936).  Dr.  Maw  was  elected  to 
the  Utah  State  Senate  in  1928  for  four 
years;  again  in  1932  for  two  years  and 
in  1934  for  four  years.  He  was  presi- 
dent of  the  Senate  during  its  twenty- 
fourth  legislature  in  1935-1936. 

Bro.  Maw  was  baptized  at  the  age  of 
ten,  ordained  a  Deacon  at  the  age  of 
12  and  on  later  dates  ordained  a  Teach- 
er, an  Elder  and  a  High  Priest.  He 
has  served  in  the  capacities  of  block 


teacher,  Sunday  school  teacher,  M.  I. 
A.  teacher,  M.  I.  A.  superintendent 
and  second  counselor  to  Bishop  I.  Owen 
Horsefall  in  the  9th  Ward  of  Liberty 
Stake.  Later  he  served  as  stake  presi- 
dent of  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Liberty  Stake 
from  1920  to  1925,  as  second  counselor 
to  J.  Pei'cy  Goddard  in  the  stake  Sun- 
day school  superintendency  of  Liberty 
Stake  in  1928,  as  superintendent  of 
Sunday  schools  of  Liberty  Stake  in 
1928  and  1929,  and  was  also  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  Liberty  Stake 
in  1928  and  1929.  While  attending  the 
Northwestern  University  in  Chicago  in 
1925-1927  he  taught  in  the  Logan 
Square  Branch  Sunday  School.  He 
served  on  the  general  board  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1928  to  1935,  dur- 
ing most  of  which  period  he  was  chair- 
man of  the  "M  Men"  committee  and 
was  sustained  as  a  member  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union  Board 
Dec.  10,  1935. 

During  the  World  war,  Bro.  Maw 
enlisted  in  the  Aviation  Corps  at  Fort 
Douglas,  Utah,  July  30,  1917,  was 
transferred  to  Kelly  Field,  Texas,  in 
August  of  that  year,  and  graduated 
from  the  Aviation  Ground  School  for 
Pilots  in  February,  1918.  He  was  ap- 
pointed one  of  the  L.  D.  S.  chaplains 
in  March,  1918,  with  the  rank  of  first 
lieutenant  and  was  assigned  chaplain 
at  large  of  the  89th  Div.,  Camp  Funs- 
ton,  Kansas.  He  went  over  seas  in  the 
spring  of  1918,  saw  active  sei'vice  at 
the  front  until  Armistice  Day,  1918, 
served  with  the  Army  of  Occupation 
in  Germany  until  May,  1919,  and  was 
discharged  at  Fort  Russell,  Wyoming, 
June  28,  1919.  He  is  the  author  of  a 
book  entitled  "Public  Speaking  for  the 
Beginner"  and  a  number  of  magazine 
articles.  On  June  22,  1922,  he  married 
Florence  Buehler;  four  children  have 
been  born  of  this  union,  namely,  Her- 
bert Warren,  Florence  LaRue,  Emma 
Jean  and  Shirley  Bea  (the  last  named 
now  deceased;. 

NICHOLS,  DeLore,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 


218 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


School  Union,  was  born  July  14,  1889, 
in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  George 
W.  Nichols  and  Bertha  Magdeline  Jen- 
sen.   He  was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1898,  by 


Peter  Sorensen  and  attended  the  grade 
and  high  school  of  Brigham  City,  and, 
being  a  lover  of  sport,  he  played  on 
the  first  basketball  team  organized  in 
the  last  named  school.  After  com- 
pleting one  year  of  high  school,  he 
filled  a  mission  to  England.  Upon  his 
return  he  entered  the  Utah  State  Agri- 
cultural College  in  the  fall  of  1913  and 
graduated  in  1917.  During  the  partici- 
pation of  the  United  States  in  the 
World  war,  Bro.  Nichols  was  placed 
in  charge  of  some  250  war  gardens  in 
Logan  and  vicinity.  Since  that  time  he 
has  been  associated  with  the  Agricul- 
tural College  Extension  Service,  hav- 
ing headquarters  at  different  times  in 
Flagstaff,  Coconino  Co.,  Arizona,  and 
in  Morgan  County,  Utah.  At  present 
he  is  located  in  Davis  County,  Utah, 
and  resides  at  Farmington.  While 
living  in  Morgan  County,  he  was  a 
member  and  later  president  of  the 
Morgan  Stake  Sunday  School  Board, 
a  member  of  the  Morgan  Stake  High 
Council  and  dii'ector  of  teacher-train- 
ing work.  He  became  a  member  of 
the  South  Davis  Stake  Sunday  School 


Board  as  soon  as  he  located  in  that 
county  and  was  sustained  as  superin- 
tendent of  Sunday  schools  in  the  stake 
Jan.  11,  1929.  Bro  Nichols  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  9,  1923,  by 
W.  W.  Francis,  and  on  Nov.  21,  1934, 
he  became  a  member  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union  Board. 

In  1922  Elder  Nichols  married  Char- 
lotte Stallings  of  Ogden,  an  active 
Church  worker,  having  been  president 
of  the  Ogden  Stake  Primary  Board 
and  a  member  of  the  faculty  of  the 
Weber  College.  Brother  and  Sister 
Nichols  have  two  little  daughters, 
Natell  and  LaDene,  and  the  family  is 
most  highly  esteemed,  being  leaders 
in  the  promotion  of  social,  dramatic 
and  literary  projects  as  well  as  in 
Church  activities  in  the  ward  and 
stake. 

PACK,  Frederick  James,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union  since  1930,  was 
born  at  Bountiful,  Utah,  Feb.  2,  1875, 
a  son  of  John  Pack  (a  pioneer  of  July 


22,  1847)  and  Mary  Jane  Walker  (a 
pioneei-  of  1852).  He  was  baptized  in 
his  youth  by  Joseph  Hyrum  Grant,  and 
confirmed  by  Benjamin  Ashby.  He 
held  various  positions  in  the  Aaronic 
Priesthood;  was  ordained  an  Elder  by 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


219 


Mahonri  M.  Brown,  Dec.  4, 1892,  a  Sev- 
enty by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  Dec.  18, 
1896,  and  a  High  Priest  by  John  W. 
Taylor  in  1897. 

On  the  18th  of  December,  1896,  he 
and  his  wife  were  set  apart  to  assist 
John  W.  Taylor  in  opening  the  Colo- 
rado Mission.  Elder  Pack  was  later 
called  to  preside  over  the  Pueblo  Con- 
ference, and  still  later  over  the  Colo- 
rado Springs  Conference.  He  return- 
ed home  in  1898. 

Elder  Pack  was  a  member  of  the 
Religion  Class  Board  of  Logan  Stake 
in  1906-1907,  a  member  of  the  Bishop- 
ric of  the  33rd  Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City 
in  1908-1911,  the  superintendent  of  the 
Sunday  schools  of  the  Liberty  Stake 
in  1911-1916,  and  a  member  of  the 
High  Council  of  Liberty  Stake  in  1920- 
1930. 

He  is  the  author  of  numerous  treat- 
ises, both  scientific  and  religious, 
prominently  among  the  latter  being 
his  books  "Tobacco  and  Human  Effi- 
ciency" and  "Science  and  Belief  in 
God."  He  is  also  the  author  of  the  les- 
sons for  the  gospel  doctrine  depart- 
ment of  the  Sunday  schools  for  the 
years  1932,  1933,  1937,  and  the  theo- 
logical lessons  of  the  Relief  Society  for 
the  years  1932,  1933,  1934,  1935.  Upon 
invitation  of  Pres.  Rudger  Clawson,  he 
gave  a  series  of  28  weekly  radio  lec- 
tures dealing  with  the  Breadth  of  Mor- 
monism,  April  3,  to  Oct.  9,  1932. 

Elder  Pack  received  his  early  edu- 
cation in  the  public  schools  of  Bounti- 
ful and  at  the  L.  D.  S.  College  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  later  attended  the 
University  of  Utah,  where  he  obtained 
the  degree  of  mining  engineer  in  1904. 
In  1905  he  was  graduated  from  the 
Columbia  University,  New  York  City, 
with  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts, 
and  in  1906  with  the  degree  of  Doctor 
of  Philosophy.  At  that  time  he  was 
elected  to  membership  in  the  honorary 
scientific  society  of  Sigma  Xi.  For  one 
year,  1906-1907,  he  was  professor  of 
geology  and  mineralogy  at  the  Brig- 
ham  Young  College  at  Logan,  Utah. 


In  1907  he  was  called  to  the  Deseret 
Professorship  of  Geology  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah,  which  position  he  oc- 
cupies at  present.  Doctor  Pack  is  a 
Fellow  in  the  Royal  Scottish  Geograph- 
ical Society  of  Edinburg,  a  Fellow  of 
the  Geological  Society  of  London,  and 
a  Fellow  of  the  Geological  Society  of 
America. 

On  the  25th  of  November,  1896, 
Elder  Pack  married  Sadie  Grant, 
daughter  of  Joseph  Hyrum  Grant  and 
Evaletta  Eldredge.  The  following 
named  children  have  blessed  their 
union:  Eugene  G.,  Alvin  G.,  Marion, 
and  Eleanor.  Since  1908  Elder  Pack 
and  his  family  have  resided  in  Salt 
Lake  City  at  501  South  Thirteenth 
East  Street. 

PETERSEN,  P.  Melvin,  a  member 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
General  Board,  was  born  Feb.  15,  1886, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  son  of  Waldemar 
H.  Petersen  and  Elizabeth  Hailstone. 
He  was  baptized  in  1895,  later  ordain- 
ed to  the  offices  of  Deacon  and  Teach- 
er by  Elder  Joseph  H.  Felt,  and  an 
Elder,  Nov,  26,  1905.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy,  April  29,  1912,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young  and  a  High  Priest,  Aug.  28, 
1932,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.  His 
boyhood  home  being  in  the  11th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  he  served  in  a  number 
of  leading  capacities  including  that  of 
ward  chorister.  While  studying  music 
in  New  York  City  he  acted  as  superin- 
tendent of  the  Sunday  school  of  the 
branch  of  the  Church  there  and  after 
his  return  home  was  appointed  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  Board,  May  23,  1922.  He  served 
as  a  president  of  the  3rd  Quorum  of 
Seventy  and  has  been  a  faithful  mem- 
ber of  the  Tabernacle  choir.  He  ac- 
companied this  organization  as  one 
of  the  soloists  in  1911,  during  a  five 
weeks  tour  of  the  principal  cities  in 
the  Eastern  States.  After  graduating 
from  the  New  York  College  of  Music 
he  became  an  instructor  of  music  at 
the  University  of  Utah  from  1917  to 
1919,  when  he  was  appointed   super- 


220 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


visor  of  music  in  the  Salt  Lake  City 
public  schools.  This  position  he  held 
until  1920,  since  which  time  he  has 
been  director  of  music  at  the  West 
High  School.  He  was  one  of  the  or- 
ganizers of  the  L.  D.  S.  School  of  Mu- 
sic, which  later  became  the  McCune 
School  of  Music.  On  Dec.  5,  1906,  he 
married  Viona  Banks  (daughter  of 
Orville  Dye  Banks  and  Marion  Bow- 
ring),  born  July  2,  1885,  in  Ogden, 
Utah.  Nine  children  have  been  born 
of  this  marriage,  namely,  Viona,  Hugh 
Waldemar,  Melvin  Banks,  Orma  B., 
LeRoy  E.,  Elizabeth  B.,  Marion  B., 
Laurette  B.,  and  Orville  B. 

During  the  pageant,  "The  Message 
of  the  Ages,"  in  April,  1930,  Bro.  Pe- 
tersen represented  one  of  the  leading 
characters,  that  of  Ephraim.  He  has 
been  invited  to  sing  in  many  Church 
services  and  gives  generously  of  his 
time  and  talent  in  behalf  of  the  Church 
and  civic  organizations.  He  is  a 
teacher  and  singer  of  prominence 
throughout  the   State  of  Utah. 

PYPER,  George  Bollinger,  general 
superintendent  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union,  was  born  Nov.  21,  1860, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Alex- 
ander C.  Pyper  and  Christiana  Dollin- 
ger.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  officiated  in  the  offices  of 
the  Aaronic  Priesthood  and  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  1883,  and  later  or- 
dained a  High  Priest.  In  1901  a  sketch 
of  Elder  Pyper's  life  was  published  in 
the  Biographical  Encyclopedia  Vol  1, 
p.  669.  Since  that  time  he  continued 
to  act  as  manager  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Theatre  until  1929,  when  the  edifice 
was  torn  down.  For  a  period  of  over 
thirty  years  he  had  brought  to  the 
people  the  finest  attractions  the  stage 
afforded  and  during  that  period  also 
brought  to  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake 
City,  many  world-famed  artists  and 
musical  organizations.  In  1928  he  pub- 
lished the  story  of  the  Salt  Lake  The- 
atre and  early  drama  in  Salt  Lake,  un- 
der the  title  of  "The  Romance  of  An 


Old  Playhouse."  Among  the  side  ac- 
tivities he  was  a  member  of  the  first 
Salt  Lake  Board  of  Education,  and  of 
the  first  City  Library  Board;  also  pres- 


ident of  the  Salt  Lake  Oratorio  Soci- 
ety and  Musical  Arts  and  Civic  Music 
Association,  and  since  its  organization 
has  been  first  assistant  to  Elder  Mel- 
vin J.  Ballard  in  the  Church  Music 
committee.  In  1909  he  installed  a 
Church  exhibit  in  the  Government 
Building  at  the  Alaska-Yukon  Expo- 
sition at  Seattle,  Washington.  The 
models  of  the  temple  and  tabernacle 
used  at  that  fair  were  taken  to  the 
Smithsonian  Institute  at  Washington, 
D.  C,  and  recently  have  been  shown 
at  the  Century  of  Progress  in  Chica- 
go, and  the  San  Diego  expositions. 
Elder  Pyper  was  chairman  of  the  Cen- 
tury of  Progress  Church  committee 
and  in  consultation  with  the  Fair- 
banks family  (J.  B.,  J.  Leo  and  Ar- 
vard)  supervised  the  preparation  of 
that  wonderful  exhibit. 

In  November,  1911,  Elder  Pyper 
managed  the  Tabernacle  Choir  in  a 
6000  mile  tour  to  the  National  Irriga- 
tion Congress  held  in  Madison  Square 
Garden,  New  York  City,  and  extended 
the    tour    to    Washington    and    other 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


221 


cities  of  the  United  States.  On  this 
tour  the  choir  sang  before  Pres.  Taft 
in  the  White  House.  In  1934  he  con- 
ducted the  tour  of  the  choir  to  the  Cen- 
tury of  Progress  Fair  in  Chicago, 
where  it  sang  for  a  week  at  the  Ford 
auditorium.  In  1929  he  was  named 
as  chairman  of  the  L.  D.  S.  Pageant 
Committee  which  produced  the  great 
spectacle  "The  Message  of  the  Ages" 
in  the  Tabernacle,  Salt  Lake  City, 
April  6,  1930,  as  part  of  the  exercises 
celebrating  the  one  hundredth  anni- 
versary of  the  organization  of  the 
Church.  The  pageant  involved  1500 
people,  ran  for  30  nights  and  was  wit- 
nessed by  approximately  200,000  peo- 
ple. Following  the  pageant  Bro.  Py- 
per  visited  the  Hawaiian  Islands  in 
the  interest  of  the  Sunday  schools  and 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  He  was  among  the 
early  flyers  from  Hilo  to  Honolulu. 
Since  January,  1910 — a  period  of  27 
years — he  has  been  associate  editor  of 
"The  Juvenile  Instructor,"  now  "The 
Instructor." 

When  Elder  David  O.  McKay  was 
appointed  general  superintendent  of 
the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union  in 
1918,  he  chose  Elders  Stephen  L. 
Richai'ds  as  his  first,  and  George  D. 
Pyper  as  his  second  assistant.  This 
position  Elder  Pyper  held  until  Oct. 
30,  1934,  when  he  was  set  apart  as 
general  superintendent,  with  Elders 
Milton  Bennion  and  George  R.  Hill  as 
assistants.  At  this  writing  he  is  well 
and  active  though  far  beyond  the  bib- 
lical three  score  and  ten. 

REES,  Alfred  C,  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union  since  1920,  was  born 
Feb.  9,  1876,  at  Grantsville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Joseph  A.  Rees  and  Christina 
Amelia  Hassel.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  by  A.  R.  M.  Beck  in 
Spanish  Fork,  the  family  home.  From 
his  earliest  youth  he  has  been  contin- 
uously active  in  the  organizations  of 
the  Church.  He  served  as  a  mission- 
ary in  Switzerland  in   1899-1902,  two 


years  in  field  work  and  one  year  as 
secretary  of  the  mission,  during  which 
time  he  compiled  a  brief  history  of  the 
Church  in  the  German  language  for 
mission  use.  After  his  return  home 
he  located  in  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he 
served  as  a  teacher  in  the  17th  Ward 
Sunday  School,  as  a  member  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Sunday  School  Board, 
as  superintendent  of  the  22nd  Ward 
Sunday  School,  as  a  member  of  the 
superintendency  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Sunday  schools,  member  of  the  super- 
intendency of  the  31st  Ward  Sunday 
school,  superintendent  of  Sunday 
schools  in  Liberty  Stake  and,  since  Oct, 
10,  1920,  has  been  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union.  He  was  engaged  in 
newspaper  work  for  12  years,  acted  as 
the  executive  director  of  the  Utah 
Manufacturers'  Association,  of  the 
Utah  Associated  Industries  and  of  the 
Utah  Taxpayers'  Association.  He  has 
served  as  national  chairman  of  the 
Council  of  American  Industry  and  is 
recognized  as  a  national  authority  on 
taxation  and  public  relations. 

On  Jan.  4,  1906,  he  married  Ida  Da- 
vis of  Salt  Lake  City,  who  has  occu- 
pied important  positions  in  the  Relief 
societies  of  the  Salt  Lake  and  Liberty 
stakes  and  is  a  writer  of  ability.  This 
marriage  has  been  blessed  with  six 
children,  namely,  Alfred  D.,  Lyman 
D.,  Stanley  D.,  Richard  D.,  William 
D.   (deceased)   and  Elias  D. 

REISER,  Albert  Hamer,  general  sec- 
retary of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  Board,  was  born  Aug.  31,  1897, 
a  son  of  Albert  S.  Reiser  and  Nellie 
Hamer.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  31, 
1905,  by  Alexander  Burt,  was  ordain- 
ed an  Elder  on  April  21,  1931,  a  Sev- 
enty by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  and  a  High 
Priest  May  24,  1936.  He  was  edu- 
cated in  the  public  schools  of  Salt 
Lake  City  and  at  the  L.  D.  S.  High 
School  and  Business  College.  He  grad- 
uated from  the  high  school  in  1916, 
and  the  same  year  was  awarded  a  cer- 
tificate   of    graduation    in    shorthand 


222 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


from  the  Business  College.  He  gradu- 
ated from  the  University  of  Utah  with 
a  Bachelor's  Degree  in  1919  and  acted 
as  assistant  registrar  in  that  institu- 
tion in  1919-1920.     He  served  as  part 


time  instructor  in  English,  economics 
and  commercial  law  in  the  L.  D.  S. 
College  for  three  years,  studied  law 
at  the  University  of  Utah  and  was 
admitted  to  the  bar  Oct.  20,  1926.  On 
June  1,  1922,  he  was  appointed  busi- 
;iess  manager  of  the  "Juvenile  Instruc- 
tor" (now  called  "The  Instructor"), 
and  on  Nov.  1,  1927,  of  the  "Sunday 
School  Lessons." 

On  June  9.  1920,  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple,  he  married  Elizabeth  Baxter 
(daughter  of  Samuel  E.  Baxter  and 
Lotta  Paul),  born  Feb.  2,  1897,  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  Seven  children  have  been 
born  from  this  marriage,  namely,  Al- 
bert Hamer,  Elizabeth  Lucille,  David 
Emerson,  Marilyn  Jeanne,  Barbai-a 
Anne,  Richard  Evans,  and  Elaine  Ma- 
rie. Continuing  his  duties  as  genera] 
secretary.  Elder  Reiser  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union  Sept.  30,  1924, 
which  position  he  still  holds. 

RICHARDS,  Lynn  Stephen,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Des- 


eret Sunday  School  Union,  was  born 
Feb.  3,  1901,  on  the  present  site  of  the 
Lincoln  Ward  chapel  (Granite  Stake) 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Elder 
Stephen  L.  Richards  and  Irene  Smith 
Merrill.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old  and  ordained  succes- 
sively to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teach- 
er and  Priest;  and  Elder  in  June,  1919. 
Elder  Richards  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  from  June,  1919,  to 
June,  1921,  laboring  principally  in 
Philadelphia  and  Boston.     He  acted  as 


principal  of  the  Oneida-Franklin 
Stakes  Seminary  during  the  years 
1923-1924  and  1925-1926,  and  has  been 
engaged  continuously  as  a  teacher  in 
Sunday  schools  since  1925.  He  was 
made  a  member  of  the  Liberty  Stake 
Sunday  School  superintendency  in  Oc- 
tober, 1933,  and  became  a  member 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
Board  in  October,  1934.  He  attended 
the  public  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
including  the  Granite  High  School, 
after  which  he  graduated  from  the  L. 
D.  S.  University  in  1919.  After  re- 
turning from  his  mission  he  attended 
the  University  of  Utah  in  1921-1922, 
the  Utah  State  Agricultural  College 
in  1922-1923,  and  graduated  from  the 
Brigham  Young  University  in  1924 
with  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Arts. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENYLOPEDIA 


223 


Continuing  his  education  at  the  law 
school  of  the  Leland  Stanford  Junioi* 
University  in  1926-1928,  he  received 
in  1928  the  degree  of  Juris  Doctor. 
Returning  to  Salt  Lake  City  he  w^as 
admitted  to  practice  law  in  the  Su- 
preme Court  of  the  State  of  Utah  on 
July  22,  1929,  and  in  the  District  Court 
of  the  United  States  Sept.  IG,  1933.  He 
served  as  secretary  of  the  senate  of 
the  Utah  State  Legislature  in  1933- 
1935,  and  at  the  present  time  is  prac- 
ticing law  as  a  member  of  the  firm  of 
Moyle  and  Richards,  attorneys,  of  Salt 
Lake  City. 

On  Dec.  11,  1924,  Elder  Richards 
married  Lucille  Janet  Covey,  a  de- 
scendant of  Lucy  Mack,  and  this  union 
has  been  blessed  with  four  children, 
namely,  Lynn  Stephen,  jun.,  Joseph 
Covey,  Rosalie  Lucille  and  Victoria 
Janet. 

As  a  young  man  Elder  Richards  has 
rendered  valuable  service  to  the  Church 
and  to  the  community  at  large. 

ROLAPP,  Henry  Hermann,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union  Board  and  chairman  of  the 
Church  Auditing  Committee,  a  sketch 
of  whose  life  to  the  close  of  1920  is 
published  in  the  L.  D.  S.  Biograph- 
ical Encyclopedia,  Vol.  3,  p.  501,  was 
called  in  1927  to  succeed  Elder  B.  H. 
Roberts  as  president  of  the  Eastern 
States  Mission.  After  his  return  home 
in  1929,  he  resided  in  Los  Angeles, 
Calif.,  where  he  died  Jan.  8,  1936.  His 
remains  were  brought  to  Ogden  for 
interment,  where  impressive  services 
were  held,  presided  over  by  Pres.  He- 
ber  J.  Grant. 

ROSS,  Charles  J.,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union,  since  1919,  was  born 
Feb.  28,  1867,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  son 
of  James  D.  and  Sarah  E.  Ross.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  ordained  to  the  Aaronic  Priest- 
hood, served  as  a  counselor  in  a  Dea- 
cons' Quorum,  and  later  was  ordained 


an  Elder  by  Apostle  John  W.  Taylor. 
On  April  11,  1892,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  B.  H.  Roberts  and  became 
a  member  of  the  77th  Quorum  of  Sev- 
enty.   He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 


by  Lorenzo  Farr  and  served  as  sec- 
retary of  a  High  Priests'  Quorum  in 
the  Weber  Stake.  He  also  served  on 
the  Weber  Stake  Sunday  School 
Board,  becoming  1st  assistant  to  Su- 
perintendent Thomas  B.  Evans,  and 
was  a  member  of  the  Weber  Stake 
High  Council.  He  was  instrumental 
in  organizing  the  Weber  Stake  Tab- 
ernacle Choir  and  acted  as  president 
and  manager  of  that  organization  for 
over  twenty-five  years.  In  this  period 
he  arranged  tours  for  the  choir  to  the 
Lewis  and  Clark  Exposition  at  Port- 
land, Oregon,  and  to  California  at  the 
opening  of  the  Irrigation  Congi-ess 
when  they  sang  the  magnificent  "Ir- 
rigation Ode,"  composed  by  Prof.  John 
J.  McClelland  and  published  under  the 
direction  of  Bro.  Ross.  The  Weber 
Stake  Choir  also  sang  at  other  great 
fairs  at  San  Diego  and  San  Francisco. 
In  1897  Elder  Ross  married  Isabell  H. 
Salmon,  now  a  counselor  in  the  gen- 
eral board  of  the  Primai'y  Association, 
Bro.  Ross  is  an  insurance  and  real 
estate  salesman,  has  worked  with  the 
Beneficial  Life  Insurance  Co.,  the  Kim- 


224 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


ball  and  Richards  land  merchants  and 
the  Government  Home  Owners  Loan 
Corporation. 

SEEGMILLER,  Frank  K.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Des- 
eret  Sunday  School  Union  since  1919, 
was  born  in  Richfield,  Utah,  Aug.  20, 
1875,  a  son  of  William  Henry  Seeg- 
miller  and  Mary  Ellen  Laidlaw.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  3,  1883,  by  Richard 
Nielsen,  ordained  a  Deacon  Oct.  23, 
1888,  by  Simon  Christensen,  a  Teach- 
er Sept.  9,  1891,  by  Bishop  Joseph 
S.  Home,  and  an  Elder  Jan.  3,  1895, 
by  his  father.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  July  15,  1896,  by  John  Henry 
Smith,  and  a  High  Priest  Sept.  13, 
1931,  by  William  C.  Winder. 

From  September,  1891,  to  May,  1894, 
he  attended  the  L.  D.  S.  College,  study- 
ing under  Pres.  Willard  Done  and  Dr. 
James  E.  Talmage,  from  which  insti- 
tution he  graduated  in  May,  1894.  He 
received  his  endowments  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  June  26,  1896,  and  from 
July,  1896,  to  January,  1899,  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Switzerland  and  Germany, 
during  which  he  opened  up  a  mission 
district  in  Darmstadt  (Hesse),  in 
Germany,  and  also  presided  over  the 
Frankfurt  a  M  Conference.  After  his 
return  from  this  mission  he  presided 
over  the  Richfield  2nd  Ward  Sunday 
School.  Later,  having  become  a  resi- 
dent of  Salt  Lake  City,  he  acted  as  a 
member  of  the  Granite  Stake  Sunday 
School  superintendency,  and  in  1919 
became  a  member  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day  School   Union  Board. 

Bro.  Seegmiller  is  a  teacher  by  pro- 
fession, and  in  1894-1895  was  princi- 
pal of  a  grade  school  in  Thurber,  Utah, 
and  from  1895  to  1896,  principal  of  a 
grade  school  in  Snowflake,  Arizona. 
Returning  to  Richfield  he  was  associ- 
ated with  the  high  school  there  from 
1899  to  1908,  part  of  the  time  in  the 
position  of  principal  of  that  school. 
From  1908  to  1929  he  was  instructor 
of  modern  languages  at  the  L.  D.  S. 
University  and   ulso  acted  as   second 


counselor  to  Pres.  Willard  Young  and 
to  Pres.  Osborn  J.  P.  Widtsoe,  and  a.-^ 
first  counselor  to  Pres.  Guy  C.  Wilson. 
For  some  time  he  was  also  principal 
of  the  high  school  in  that  institution, 
and  he  is  at  the  present  time  (1936) 
principal  of  the  Granite  L.  D.  S.  Sem- 
inary. 

On  Aug.  13,  1902,  Elder  Seegmiller 
married  Ruth  Henrietta  Baker.  Six 
children  have  blessed  this  union,  name- 
ly, Francis  Marion  Seegmiller  (born 
1903),  Ralph  Lane  Seegmiller  (born 
and  died  in  1905),  Arlo  Baker  Seeg- 
miller (born  1908),  Junius  William 
Seegmiller  (born  and  died  in  1912), 
David  Warren  Seegmiller  (born  1916) 
and  Marie  Seegmiller   (born   1919). 

SMITH,  David  Asael,  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sun- 
day School  Union,  was  born  May  24, 
1879,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
President  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Julina 
Lambson.      He  was  baptized   May  24, 


1887,  served  as  an  off'icer  in  Dea- 
cons and  Teachers  quorums,  also  in 
the  Sixth  quorum  of  Elders  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  and  in  each  of  the  quo- 
rums from  Deacon  to  High  Priest. 
During  1900  and  1901  he  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Sunday 
School  Board,  and  when  the  Granite 
Stake  was  organized  he  was  sustained 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


225 


as  a  stake  supervisor  of  Religion  Class 
woi-k  and  later  became  a  member  of 
the  newly  organized  Liberty  Stake  and 
was  sustained  and  served  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  superintendency  of  the 
Stake  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  also  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Stake  Sunday  School  Board. 
He  has  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Dr.  W.  H. 
Groves  L.  D.  S.  Hospital  since  1908, 
and  for  several  years  was  its  superin- 
tendent. He  is  now  vice  president  of 
that  institution.  He  has  served  as 
president  of  the  Tabernacle  Choir  since 
1908  and  as  one  of  the  Presiding 
Bishopric  since  December,  1-907.  (See 
also  Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  3,  p.  775.) 

SPERRY,    Lucy    Emma    Gedge,    a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union  since 
1926,  was  born  July  23,  1899,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Na- 
than Gedge  and  Charlotte  Lane.  She 
was  baptized  July  23,  1907,  by  Theo- 
dore Schoenfeld  and  received  her  edu- 
cation in  the  public  schools  of  Salt 
Lake  City.  After  graduating  from  a 
normal  course  in  the  University  of 
Utah,  she  taught  school  from  1920  to 
1928.  She  became  a  Sunday  School 
teacher  at  an  early  age  and  later 
served  on  the  Pioneer  Stake  Sunday 
School  Board,  the  Granite  Stake  Sun- 
day School  Board  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Desei-et  Sunday  School 
Union  Board  in  1928.  On  June  17, 
1924,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  she 
was  united  in  marriage  to  Rulon  J. 
Sperry;  two  children  have  been  born 
from  this  union,  namely,  Geraldine 
(born  Jan.  16,  1932),  and  Robert  La 
Mont   (born  March  26,  1936). 

THOMAS,  Elbert  Duncan,  United 
States  Senator  and  member  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union  Board 
since  1929,  was  born  June  17,  1883, 
in  the  7th  Ward  of  the  old  Salt  Lake 
Stake,  the  son  of  Richard  K.  Thomas 
and  Caroline  Stockdale,  who  emigrat- 
ed from  England  to  Utah  in   1863. 


The  associations  incident  to  activi- 
ties revolving  around  the  old  "Bar- 
nacle," a  little  theater  built  by  his 
father,  R.  K.  Thomas,  for  the  use  of 


his  family  and  their  neighbors,  gave 
him  an  opportunity  to  meet  leaders  of 
Salt  Lake's  political  and  cultural 
groups.  This  resulted  in  his  taking  an 
interest  in  politics  and  dramatics.  He 
and  his  wife  (Edna  Harker)  both  be- 
came widely  recognized  as  amateurs 
in  their  youthful  days  on  the  stage. 
As  early  as  1898  as  a  boy  speaker,  he 
appeared  at  political  rallies.  When 
eight  years  of  age  Elbert  D.  Thomas 
was  baptized  by  John  Keddington  and 
passed  regularly  through  the  Priest- 
hood grades  of  Deacon,  Teacher,  El- 
der, Seventy,  and  High  Priest.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  George  Al- 
bert Smith  when  he  was  set  apart  for 
a  mission,  and  later  became  one  of 
the  presidents  of  the  historic  3rd 
Quorum  of  Seventy.  He  was  presi- 
dent of  the  7th  Ward  M.  I.  A.  and  a 
member  of  the  Pioneer  Stake  Mutual 
Board.  He  also  served  for  many  years 
as  president  of  the  17th  Ward  M.  I. 
A.  and  as  a  member  of  the  old  Salt 
Lake  Stake  M.  I.  A.  Board.  Both  in 
the  Pioneer  and  Salt  Lake  stakes,  he 
served  as  a  home  missionary.    He  is 


Vol.  IV.  No.  15 


April  11,  1936 


226 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


at  the  present  time  (1936)  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake,  a  member  of  the  Stake  Board 
of  Education,  and  since  1926  has 
served  as  a  member  of  the  general 
board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
Union.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Elder  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  in 
1925. 

With  his  wife,  Edna  Harker  Thom- 
as, who  was  for  years  second  assistant 
general  superintendent  of  the  Primary 
Associations,  he  left  for  Japan  in 
1907,  where  he  became  secretary  and 
later  president  of  the  Japan  Mission. 
They  were  released  in  October,  1912, 
and  returned  home  after  a  tour  through 
Asia,  northern  Africa,  and  Europe. 
There  is  in  the  Japanese  language  one 
small  book  written  by  Brother  Thom- 
as entitled  "Sukui  No  Michi,"  (The 
Way  To  Salvation),  and  a  larger  book 
of  three  hundred  pages  containing  his 
writings.  These  writings  are  address- 
es and  articles  dealing  with  many  gos- 
pel themes.  They  were  first  written 
in  English  and  then  translated  into 
Japanese  colloquial  for  oral  reading. 
Later  they  were  transcribed  into  the 
Japanese  written  language  by  Elder 
Lloyd  O.  Ivie  and  published  by  the 
Mission  under  the  direction  of  Pres. 
Grant  Ivins.  Under  Pres.  Thomas'  di- 
rection the  translation  of  the  L.  D.  S. 
Hymn  Book  was  commenced.  This 
translation  continued  until  the  entire 
L.  D.  S.  Hymn  Book  was  translated 
in  such  a  way  that  the  tunes  as  used 
in  English  could  be  sung  in  Japanese, 
and  then  it  was  published.  The  trans- 
lation of  the  most  significant  sections 
of  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants  and  of 
Talmage's  "Articles  of  Faith"  were 
also  begun.  Dr.  Talmage's  book  was 
later  finished  and  published  by  Pres. 
H.  Grant  Ivins. 

Brother  Thomas  finished  the  grade 
schools  (the  Grant  School  in  Salt  Lake 
City)  in  1899  and  went  directly  as  a 
preparatory  student  to  the  University 
of  Utah.  As  a  student  and  a  mem- 
ber of  the  faculty  of  the  University 


he  spent  twenty-seven  years. 

He  has  received  three  academic  de- 
grees from  three  different  institutions: 
A.  B.  (Utah,  1906),  Ph.D.  (Calif., 
1924),  and  LL.  D.  (Hon.,  U.  of  So. 
Calif.,  1935).  The  last  degree  was 
conferred  in  recognition  of  "distin- 
guished achievement  in  education  and 
public  service."  As  an  undergraduate 
he  majored  in  Latin  and  Greek.  He 
took  his  doctor's  degree  in  political 
science  and  oriental  languages. 

On  returning  from  his  mission,  upon 
the  recommendation  of  Professor  By- 
ion  Cummings  and  Pres.  J.  T.  Kings- 
bury, he  was  appointed  by  the  regents 
of  the  University  of  Utah  an  instruc- 
tor in  Latin  and  Greek  at  the  Uni- 
versity. This  marked  the  beginning 
of  an  educational  career  which  has 
been  varied.  For  six  years  he  served 
as  a  University  administrative  officer, 
having  charge  of  the  secretary's  and 
registi-ar's  offices.  As  secretary  of 
the  board  of  regents,  he  administered 
the  University's  financial  affairs.  Dur- 
ing the  World  war,  along  with  the 
State  and  University  funds,  he  was 
responsible  for  hundreds  of  thousands 
of  dollars  of  Federal  moneys  which  the 
government  expended  through  the  Uni- 
versity. From  1917  to  1922,  he  was 
chairman  of  the  Military  Affairs 
Committee  of  the  University.  Brother 
Thomas  served  as  2nd  lieutenant  in 
the  First  Infantry  of  the  Utah  Na- 
tional Guard  in  1906  and  1907.  From 
1918  to  1924  he  was  a  major  in  the 
inspector  general's  department,  Unit- 
ed States  Reserves.  In  1920  he  was 
nominated  by  the  State  Democratic 
Convention  for  the  office  of  Secretary 
of  State. 

His  life  in  the  Far  East  gave  him 
Asiatic  interests  and  he  organized 
courses  at  the  University  of  Utah 
dealing  with  Asia.  This  work  brought 
him  recognition  in  educational  cen- 
ters and  as  a  result  he  has  been  hon- 
ored with  an  executive  committee 
membership  in  the  American  Council 
of  Learned  Societies.     His  book,  "Chi- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


227 


nese  Political  Thought,"  is  a  result  of 
this  interest.  He  was  made  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Carnegie  European  Con- 
ference of  American  Professors  in 
1926,  which  gave  him  the  opportunity 
to  study  intei-national  organizations 
at  The  Hague,  Geneva,  and  Paris.  In 
1934  he  received  the  Oberlaender 
award  for  study  in  Germany.  He  is  a 
member  of  the  executive  council  of  the 
American  Society  of  International  Law 
and  has  membership  in  the  American 
Political  Science  Association  and  the 
Chinese  Social  and  Political  Science 
Association.  He  was  awarded  a  medal 
for  distinguished  services  in  the  so- 
cial sciences  by  the  Pi  Gamma  Mu 
national  honorary  fraternity,  and  is 
a  member  of  Phi  Delta  Theta  and  Phi 
Kappa  Phi. 

From  1922  to  1924  he  served  as  a 
teaching  fellow  in  political  science  at 
the  University  of  California  and  in 
1933,  when  he  left  the  University  of 
Utah  to  assume  his  duties  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  United  States  Senate,  he 
held  a  professorship  in  political  sci- 
ence. In  1935  he  delivered  a  series 
of  lectures  at  the  University  of  Cali- 
fornia on  "Modern  Political  Trends 
As  Reflected   in  Legislation." 

In  the  United  States  Senate  he 
serves  on  the  committees  of  Foreign 
Relations,  Military  Affairs,  Education 
and  Labor,  Mines  and  Mining,  and  the 
Pensions.  He  served  as  a  member  of 
the  select  committee  to  investigate  the 
1932  election  in  Louisiana.  Appointed 
by  Vice  President  Garner  in  1935,  he 
serves  now  as  vice  chairman  of  the 
Thomas  Jefferson  National  Memorial 
Commission. 

Brother  and  Sister  Thomas  have 
three  daughters,  namely,  Chiyo,  Esther 
(Mrs.  Wayne  Clayton  Grover),  and 
Edna  Louise.  (See  also  Bio.  Ency. 
Vol.  2,  p.  722.) 

TRIBE,  Junius  Rallison,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union,  was  born 
Oct.  9,  1904,  at  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  Joseph  Tribe  and  Mary  Anne 


Rallison.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  3, 
1913,  by  David  W.  Tribe,  and  con- 
firmed a  member  of  the  Church  by 
Fred  W.  Rallison,  ordained  a  Deacon 
April  9,  1917,  by  Hyrum  E.  Lund,  a 
Teacher  May   16,   1920,  by  Hyrum  E. 


Lund,  and  a  Priest  Jan.  23,  1921,  by 
John  W.  Chambers.  He  was  ordained 
an  Elder  April  1,  1923,  by  Hyrum  E. 
Lund  and  presided  over  the  2nd  Quo- 
rum of  Elders  in  the  4th  Ward  of  the 
Ogden  Stake  from  1925  to  1926.  On 
Jan.  10,  1936,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Stake  Pres.  Wm.  H.  Reeder, 
jun.  In  1926-1928  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States,  and  after  his  re- 
turn presided  for  two  years  over  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Ogden  4th  Ward. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Mount  Ogden 
Stake  Sunday  School  Board  from 
1931  to  1935,  and  became  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union,  Dec.  22,  1935. 
He  has  been  actively  engaged  in  Sun- 
day school  work  since  his  early  youth 
with  the  exception  of  two  years 
in  M.  I.  A.  work,  and  during  that  time 
he  was  organist  for  the  ward  and  Sun- 
day School.  He  attended  school  in 
Ogden  and  in  1933  graduated  from 
the  University  of  Utah  with  an  A.  B. 
degree.  On  June  26,  1930,  he  mar- 
ried Alberta  Miriam  Stratford  of  Og- 


228 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


den  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  Their 
home  is  in  Ogden,  where  Bro.  Tribe 
is  employed  by  the  Utah  Power  and 
Light  Company. 

WAHLQUIST,  .John  T.,  a  member 
of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
Board  since  1932,  was  born  Sept.  10, 
1899,  at  Heber  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  John  Wahlquist  and  Elizabeth 


Campbell.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  of  age  by  David  A. 
Broadbent,  was  ordained  a  Deacon  in 
1911,  a  Teacher  in  1913,  a  Priest  in 
1915,  an  Elder  in  1919,  and  a  Seventy 
in  1933.  He  acted  as  secretary  and 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Heber 
3rd  Ward  Sunday  School  from  1915 
to  1917,  as  Elders'  Quorum  leader  in 
Hooper,  Plain  City  and  Ogden  3rd 
Ward  from  1920  to  1924;  as  stake 
teacher-trainer  in  North  Weber  Stake 
in  1923-1924,  and  in  Liberty  Stake  in 
1931-1933.  He  was  a  member  of  the 
M.  L  A.  superintendency  of  the  Uni- 
versity Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  in  1925- 
1926,  and  of  the  27th  Ward  in  1927- 
1928.  While  attending  the  University 
of  Cincinnati  in  1929-1930  he  was  a 
teacher  in  the  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Cincin- 
nati Branch  of  the  Church.  After  his 
return   home   he   acted   as   a   member 


of  the  Sunday  school  superintendency 
of  the  University  Ward  in  1930-1931, 
and  became  a  member  of  the  general 
board  of  the   Deseret  Sunday   School 
Union  in  1933.     He  received  his  edu- 
cation in  the  public  schools  of  Heber 
City  and  Provo,  at  the  Wasatch  High 
School  and  the  B.  Y.  U.  High  School 
in  Provo.    In  1924  he  received  the  de- 
gree of  B.  S.  and  in  1926  that  of  M.  S. 
from  the  University  of  Utah  and  re- 
ceived the   degree  of  Ph.   D.   in   1930 
fi'om  the  University  of  Cincinnati.   He 
has  followed  the  profession  of  a  teach- 
er, working   in  the  public   schools   of 
Uintah  Co.,  Utah,  in  1918-1920;  in  We- 
ber County  in  1920-1922,  at  the  Ogden 
Senior   High   School   in   1923-1924,   at 
the  University  of  Utah  as  an  instruc- 
tor in   1921-1928,  as  assistant  profes- 
sor in  1930-1932,  as  associate  profes- 
sor in   1932-1935,  and  as  a  professor 
since  1932.     He  has  been  a  director  of 
the  Wm.  M.  Stewart  Training  School 
at  the  University  of  Utah  since  1932. 
He  served  as  a  visiting  professor  in 
the    University    of   Cincinnati    during 
the  summers  of  1931  and  1932  and  at 
the  George  Washington  Univei'sity  at 
Washington,   D.    C,   during   the   sum- 
mer of  1935.    He  has  been  a  contrib- 
utor to  professional  journals   and  to 
L.  D.  S.  Church  publications  ("Instruc- 
tor," "Children's  Friend,"  "Relief  So- 
ciety Magazine,"  etc.)  He  is  the  author 
of  "Teaching  as  Direction   of  Activi- 
ties"   (official    teacher-training    text) 
in  1933  and  "Status  of  Junior  College 
Instructor,"  U.  S.  Office  of  Education, 
in  1931.    On  Aug.  30,  1923,  Dr.  Wahl- 
quist  married   Grace   Dorius   of   Eph- 
raim,    Utah,    which    union    has    been 
blessed    with  two   sons,    namely,    Don 
Dorius  and  Carl  Dorius. 

WHEELON,  Ruth  Agnes,  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union,  was  born  Aug. 
16,  1904,  at  Garland,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  John  Campbell  Wheelon  and  Agnes 
Ross  Wardrop.  She  was  baptized  Sept. 
6,    1913,  by  James   Jensen   and   took 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENYLOPEDIA 


229 


an  active  part  in  the  Church  activities 
suited  to  her  age.  Having  moved  to 
Idaho,  she  served  as  a  teacher  in  the 
Sunday  school  and  as  bee  keeper  in  the 


Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Twin  Falls  2nd 
Ward  in  1921,  and  in  1923  she  was 
called  to  act  as  play  leader  on  the  Pri- 
mary Board  of  the  Idaho  Stake.  She 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City,  and  in  1925- 
1926  was  chorister  of  the  M.  I.  A.  in 
the  Jefferson  Ward,  Grant  Stake.  She 
started  to  teach  Church  History  in 
the  Wasatch  Ward  Sunday  School  in 
1927.  and  in  1934  was  called  to  serve 
in  the  Church  History  Department  of 
the  Granite  Stake  Sunday  School 
Board,  but  was  released  from  that  po- 
sition a  year  later  to  become  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Desei-et  Sunday  School 
Union  Board,  being  sustained  to  that 
office  Nov.  12,  1935. 

Sister  Wheelon  graduated  from  the 
high  school  in  Twin  Falls,  Idaho,  in 
1922,  attended  the  Utah  Agricultural 
College  during  the  winter  and  spring- 
quarters  of  1924,  and  entered  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  for  the  winter  and 
spring  quarters  of  1925.  She  worked 
in  the  court  house  of  Brigham  City, 
Utah,  from  August  until  December, 
1924,  after  which,  having  moved  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  in  June,  1925,  she  be- 


came associated  with  the  Western 
Loan  and  Building  Company,  where 
she  is  still  employed.  She  is  a  member 
of  the  Altrusa  Club  of  Salt  Lake  City 
(a  business  and  professional  women's 
club),  a  national  organization,  and  she 
is  also  a  member  of  the  Beta  Delta 
Sorority,  a  social  unit  of  the  Utah 
State  Agricultural  College  at  Logan, 
Utah.  Thus,  the  training  that  Sister 
Wheelon  has  had,  added  to  a  natural 
interest  in  historical  matters,  have 
-specially  fitted  her  for  her  work  on 
the   Deseret   Sunday  School   Board. 

WITBECK,  Inez,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union  since  1928,  was  born  July 
5,  1898,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  daughter 
of  Otto  Witbeck  and  Marie  Christian- 
sen. She  was  baptized  in  1906,  edu- 
cated in  the  Salt  Lake  City  public 
schools,  the  .University  of  Utah,  and 
the  Utah  Agricultural  College.  She 
served  as  president  of  the  Forest  Dale 
Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  for  three  years, 
but  the  major  part  of  her  Church  ac- 
tivities has  been  with  the  Sunday 
School.  She  became  a  member  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union  Board 
in  1928,  and  has  rendered  very  efficient 
aid  in  the  Kindergarten  Department. 
In  1934  she  was  president  of  the  Kin- 
dergarten-Primary section  of  the  Utah 
Educational  Association  and  is  edu- 
cational director  of  the  Delta  Theta 
Chi,  a  national  educational  sorority. 


"'s^^^i*— 


GENERAL  BOARD  OF  THE  YOUNG 
MEN'S  MUTUAL  IMPROVEMENT 
ASSOCIATION 
ANDERSON,  Aldon  Joseph,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  General 
Board  since  1936,  was  born  Feb.  10, 
1892,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Peter  Anderson  and  Elise 
Amalie  Holter.  He  was  baptized 
March  30,  1906,  ordained  an  Elder 
March  30,  1916,  by  Alex.  E.  Carr,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  March  27,  1922,  by 
Wm.  A.  Newsom,  and  a  High  Priest 


230 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


'S    c 


O*  .5 
a>     S 


O 


O 


T3       o 


H 


s 

H 

o 

Q 
< 

o 
ca 

h^ 

Z 

o 

E- 
W 

o:; 

CI. 
K 


hJ 

-*-> 

(-« 

c 

OS 

6 

cS 

•-5 

fc 

^ 

•  #. 

a> 

0) 

jO 

> 

0) 

+3 

ffi 

CC 

-M 

-u 

c 

c 

0) 

CJ 

to 

"U 

a; 

*r/l 

^ 

ft 

. 

<u 

n  . 

tf 

MH 

"T? 

~ 

O 

O 

c 

d 

c 

3 

o 

01 

i-s 

►-5 

-l-> 

X. 

-tJ 

_6f 

0) 

"t^ 

-a 

o 


o 


^  ^ 


u 


C 

•C    ~    S 


C       0) 

2   c/2    c 


72    O      S 


.     >-    J= 


£ 
o 

O 

<p 

^ 

w 

c 

_o 

C 

'3 

'S 

CQ 

Q 

01 

fc 

<A 


u     r; 


►J    --   J 


1=5         3         r- 


m 


0)       O 


w   •Si'  -c  --^   S 


J_)      I— I 


^     c 


§  s 
s 


01 


^    cq 


ft,     M 


=2    >. 
£    ^  "o 


^   £  E 

O)     .— 

o   x;    I' 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


231 


April  19,  1925,  by  Harden  Bennion. 
From  1934  to  1936  he  sez-ved  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  High  Council  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake.  He  married  Minnie  E. 
Egan,  April  12,  1910,  and  they  have 
four  children,  viz.,  Aldon  Junior, 
Elaine  Winifred,  Lowell  Gary  and 
Nadine  Elise.  He  was  appointed  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  in  1936. 


Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
3,  p.  744.) 


1,  p.  419  and  Vol. 


BEAL,  Thomas  Andrew,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1922  to  1934,  was  born  July  20, 
1S74,  at  Ephraim,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Henry  Beal  and  Annie  Christina 
Byerg'o.     He  attended  the  elementary 


ANDERSON,  Edward  H.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1896  to  1907,  died  Feb.  2,  1928. 
(See  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
1,  p.  715.) 

ANDERSON,  James  H.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1907  to  1929,  died  Oct.  19,  1934 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  (See  Bio- 
g'raphical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  778.) 

ANDERSON,  Nephi,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1911  to  1923,  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  Jan.  6,  1923.  (See  Bio- 
graphical Encyclopedia,  Vol.  3,  p.  296.) 

BADGER,  Rodney  Carlos,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  from  its  organization  in  1898  to 
1912,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  Sept.  8,  1848,  a  son  of  Rodney 
Badger  (one  of  the  original  pioneers 
of  Utah)  and  Nancy  Garr.  He  grew 
up  with  the  state  and  served  in  the 
Indian  wars,  as  a  missionary  to  Cali- 
fornia, as  a  surveyor  on  the  Utah 
Central  Railroad  and  later  as  a  tele- 
graph operator,  and  was  a  member  of 
the  bishopric  of  the  15th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  for  a  number  of  years. 
He  was  a  teller  in  the  Deseret  National 
Bank  for  some  years  and  a  member  of 
the  Badger  Bros.  Company  brokers. 
He  had  a  large  family,  many  of  whom 
now  hold  prominent  positions  in  the 
stake. 

BALLARD,  Melvin  J.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1919  to  1922.    (See  Biographical 


schools  of  the  state,  took  out  a  mas- 
ter's degree  in  accounting  at  the  Gem 
City  Business  College  at  Quincy,  Illi- 
nois, and  his  A.  B.  degree  from  the 
University  of  Utah.  He  took  his 
M.  A.,  M.  S.  and  Ph.  D.  degrees  from 
the  Columbia  University.  From  1914 
to  1923  he  was  instructor  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  and  in  1923  was  ap- 
pointed dean  of  the  School  of  Com- 
merce and  Finance  in  that  institution. 
This  department  had  been  established 
largely  through  his  efforts.  For  a 
time  he  was  a  member  of  the  Board  of 
Regents  of  the  University  of  Utah.  On 
June  19,  1901,  in  the  Manti  Temple, 
Elder  Beal  married  Ida  Peterson, 
daughter  of  Pres.  Canute  Peterson  of 
the  Sanpete  Stake  and  Charlotte  Eck- 
strom. 

BEEBE,  O.  C,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1905  to  1912,  was  head  cashier  of 
Zion's  Savings  Bank  and  Trust  Com- 


232 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


pany  for  some  time  and  was  in  the 
banking  business  in  Salt  Lake  City  for 
thirty  years.  In  1917  he  donated  $600 
to  the  South  African  Mission,  and  in 
return  for  this  donation  was  credited 
with  a  two  years  mission.  He  died  in 
Los  Angeles,  California,  but  his  re- 
mains were  interred  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

BEELEY,  Arthur  Lawton,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  from  1920  to  1935,  was  born 
Aug.  28,  1890,  in  Stockport,  Cheshire, 
England,  the  son  of  William  Beeley 
and  Elizabeth  Ann  Lawton.  He  came 
to  Salt  Lake  at  the  age  of  18,  was  bap- 
tized June  15,  1907,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1913-1915,  and  was 
a  member  of  the  45th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. He  acted  as  principal  of  the 
Emery  Academy  in  Castle  Dale,  went 
to  the  University  of  Utah  in  1917,  was 
in  Europe  during  the  first  nine  months 
of  the  World  war  and  was  in  Paris 
the  day  France  declared  war  on  Ger- 
many. He  is  now  a  member  of  the 
faculty  of  the  University  of  Utah.  His 
further  activities,  etc.,  can  be  found 
in  "Who's  Who  in  America." 


terms.  He  is  now  practicing  law  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  While  residing  at 
Logan,  Elder  Bowen  was  superintend- 
ent of  the  Cache  Stake  Sunday  School 


BOWEN,  Albert  Ernest,  general  su- 
perintendent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was 
born  Oct.  31,  1875,  at  Henderson 
Creek,  Oneida  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of 
David  Bowen  and  Annie  Shackleton. 
He  was  baptized  Dec.  2,  1883,  by  Dan- 
iel E.  Price  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Switzerland  and  Germany  from  1902 
to  1904.  Just  pievious  to  leaving  for 
this  mission  Bi-o.  Bowen  had  taken  a 
B.  A.  degree,  with  honor,  at  the  Brig- 
ham  Young  College,  and  upon  his  re- 
turn became  a  member  of  the  faculty 
of  the  Brigham  Young  College.  In 
1907  he  entered  the  law  school  of  the 
Chicago  University,  having  previously 
studied  in  that  institution.  In  1911 
he  was  graduated  from  the  law  school 
with  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Juris- 
prudence, after  which  he  practiced 
law  in  Logan,  Utah,  and  served  as 
county  attorney  for  Cache  County  two 


Board  and  from  1922  to  1934  was  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Deseret  Sunday  School  Union,  from 
which  position  he  was  released  Jan.  1, 
1935,  to  succeed  Apostle  Geo.  A.  Smith 
as  general  superintendent  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A. 

In  1902  Elder  Bowen  married  Aletha 
E.  Reeder  who,  after  becoming  the 
mother  of  two  sons,  died  in  1906.  In 
1916  he  married  Emma  Lucy  Gates, 
Utah's  beloved  songstress,  and  a 
grand-daughter  of  Pres.  Brigham 
Young. 

BOWMAN,  John  Fife,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
from  1913  to  1935,  was  born  May  27, 
1880,  at  West  Weber,  Weber  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Andrew  Bowman  and  Eliza- 
beth Fife.  He  was  baptized  when  11 
years  of  age,  ordained  to  offices  in  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


233 


Aaronic  Priesthood,  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty April  11,  1900,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands  from  1900  to  1904.  He  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools,  gradu- 
ated from  the  Weber  Stake  Academy 
in  1898  and  taught  school  for  a  short 
time,  after  which  he  entered  the  law 
school  of  the  University  of  Chicago. 
Upon  his  graduation  from  that  insti- 
tution he  became  associated  with  the 
county  attorney's  office  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  from  which  position  he  resigned 
to  engage  in  private  practice  with 
the  firm  of  Stewart,  Bowman,  Morris 
and  Callister,  attorneys-at-law.  He 
served  as  mayor  of  Salt  Lake  City 
from  January,  1928,  to  January  1932. 
During  this  time  he  concentrated  much 
of  his  eff"orts  in  the  suppression  of 
crime  and  in  securing  for  the  city  an 
adequate  supply  of  water.  Bro.  Bow- 
man is  strong  in  his  convictions  and 
courageous  in  standing  by  any  prin- 
ciple he  believes  to  be  right.  He  re- 
sumed his  legal  practice  at  the  close  of 
his   municipal  office. 

On  Jan.  27,  1903,  Elder  Bowman 
married  Edna  Melissa  Smith  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple.  She  is  a  daughter 
of  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Edna 
Lambson.  Five  children  have  blessed 
this  marriage,  namely,  Dorothy,  Kath- 
erine,  John  F.,  jun.,  Ruth  and  Joseph 
Fielding. 

BRIMHALL,  Geo.  H.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1898-1932,  died  July  21,  1932. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  1,  p.  714,  and 
Vol.  3,  p.  325.) 

CANNON,  George  J.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  from  1904  to  1922. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  4,  p.  21.) 

CANNON,  Hugh  Jenne,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  born  Jan.  19,  1870,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Geo.  Q. 
Cannon  and  Sarah  Jane  Jenne.  He 
had  an  active  life  in  the  publishing 
business,  of  which  his  father  was  a 
pioneer,  being  editor  of  the  "Juvenile 


Instructor."  Besides  editing  the  Sun- 
day School  magazine,  Hugh  J.  was  a 
member  of  the  Sunday  School  Board 
for  twenty-seven  years  and  was  presi- 
dent of  the  Liberty  Stake,  Utah,  for 
twenty  years.  His  first  mission  at  the 
age  of  twenty  years  ended  in  a  year 
and  a  half  when  he  accompanied  the 
body  of  his  brother,  David  H.  Cannon, 
who  had  died  in  the  German  Mission, 
to  Utah.  He  accompanied  Elder  Da- 
vid O.  McKay  on  a  tour  of  inspection 
to  nearly  all  the  missions  of  the 
Church  in  1920  and  1921,  and  was  ed- 
itor of  the  "Improvement  Era."  He 
died  Oct.  6,   1931. 

CANNON,  Lewis  Telle,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  from  1903  to  1935,  was  born  April 
22,  1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  George  Q.  Cannon  and  Martha 
Telle.  He  was  baptized  April  22, 
1880,  by  Angus  M.  Cannon,  ordained 
a  Seventy  July  19,  1898,  by  Wilford 
Woodruff  and  filled  a  mission  to  Ger- 
many in  1898-1900,  laboring  princi- 
pally in  the  Frankfurt  Conference.  He 
is  a  prominent  architect,  doing  busi- 
ness in  Salt  Lake  under  the  title  of 
Cannon  and  Fetzer. 

CARLSON,  Oscar  William,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  from  1929  to  1935,  was  born  May 
21,  1881,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  Carlson  and  Anna  Benson. 
He  was  educated  in  the  public  schools, 
the  State  Normal  College  and  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah,  studied  law  at  the 
University  of  Chicago,  and  was  ad- 
mitted to  the  bar  in  1907.  He  is  an 
eminent  corporation  lawyer,  was 
chairman  of  the  County  Board  of 
Commissioners,  served  as  a  member 
of  the  Board  of  Regents  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah,  and  in  many  other 
civic  and  Church  capacities.  He  mar- 
ried Nellie  Wilson  and  three  children 
were  born  to  the  couple.  The  wife  died 
Jan.  16,  1919,  and  Bro.  Carlson  mar- 
ried Greta  Wilson,  who  is  the  mother 
of  two  children. 


234 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


CHRISTENSEN,    Martin   Elmer,    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  since  1935,  was  born  Sept.  13, 
1902,  in  Manassa,  Colorado,  a  son  of 
Martin  Christensen  and  Louisa  Mauss. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  25,  1910,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Oct.  13,  1902,  by  Ru- 
lon  S.  Wells,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
the  German-Austrian  Mission  in  1925- 
1928.  He  has  specialized  in  the  study 
of  chemistry  and  now  occupies  the  po- 
sition of  State  Chemist.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Hig-h  Priest  Sept.  1,  1929, 
by  Stephen  L  Richards;  married  Mel- 
ba  Morgan  Aug.  14,  1929,  which  union 
has  been  blessed  with  two  children, 
viz.,  LaRae  and  Morgan  Dale.  He 
joined  the  Boy  Scouts  of  America  in 
May,  1916,  and  labored  in  the  Cotton- 
wood Stake  among  the  scouts;  was 
stake  secretary  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in 
1923-1925,  was  chorister  in  1923-1925, 
graduated  from  the  University  of 
Utah  in  1923  with  a  B.  S.  degree,  was 
assistant  state  chemist  for  Utah  from 
1923  to  1925  and  from  1928  to  1934 
(Sept.  15),  when  he  was  appointed 
state  chemist.  He  was  appointed  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  L  A.  in  April,  1935. 

CLAWSON,  Rudger,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  L  A. 
from  1899  to  1919.  (See  Bio.  Ency. 
Vol.  1,  p.  174.) 

CLAWSON,  Thomas  A.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  L 
A.  from  1904  to  1922.  (See  Bio.  Ency. 
Vol.  2,  p.  100.) 

CLAYTON,  Alma  Carlos,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
L  A.,  from  1925  to  1935,  was  born 
Oct.  8,  1877,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  William  Clayton  and  Sarah 
Ann  Walters.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy, 
March  15,  1899,  by  John  Henry  Smith 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1899-1901.  He  has  been  as- 
sociated with  the  State  Board  of  Edu- 
cation for  a  number  of  years. 


CORNWALL,  Claude  C,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  from  1923  to  1927,  was  born  Oct. 
24,  1889,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Joseph  A.  Cornwall  and  Mary  Ellen 
Spencer.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  6, 
1897,  and  filled  a  mission  to  Califor- 
nia in  1919-1921.  Bro.  Cornwall  is  a 
graduate  of  the  University  of  Utah 
and  during  his  attendance  thei'e  did 
service  as  a  song  and  yell  leader.  For 
a  time  he  acted  as  superintendent  of 
the  Cottonwood  Stake  Y.  M.  M.  L  A. 
and  in  1923  was  appointed  field  secre- 
tary of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
L  A.  He  was  released  from  this  posi- 
tion after  having  accepted  a  position 
in  1926  to  take  charge  of  the  recrea- 
tional activity  on  the  S.  S.  "Leviathan," 
a  magnificent  ocean  liner  carrying 
passengers  between  Hoboken,  New 
Jersey,  and   England   and   France. 

CORNWALL,  J.  Spencer,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  L 


A.,  and  musical  director  of  the  or- 
ganization since  1929,  was  born  Feb. 
23,  1888,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the  son 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


235 


of  Joseph  A.  Cornwall  and  Mary  Ellen 
Spencer.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  studied  at  the  L.  D.  S.  Uni- 
versity, was  supervisor  of  music  in 
the  Granite  School  District  for  six- 
teen years,  supervisor  of  music  in  the 
San  Luis,  Colorado  schools,  and  one 
year  later  entered  the  University  of 
Utah,  and  the  Northwestern  Univer- 
sity in  Chicago,  Illinois.  He  has  been 
supervisor  of  music  in  the  Salt  Lake 
City  Schools  for  six  years,  directed 
Civic  Opera  for  six  years,  and  was 
appointed  leader  of  the  Tabernacle 
Choir,  Aug.  26,  1935.  He  is  a  worthy 
musician  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of 
the  great  directors  who  have  preceded 
him.  He  married  Mary  Haigh  in  1913 
and  they  have  seven  children. 

COWLEY,  Matthias  F.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  from  1898  to  1906.  (See  Bio.  Ency. 
Vol.  1,  p.  168.) 

DAINES,  Lyman  L.  (Dr.).  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 


I.  A.  since  1929,  was  born  March  15, 
1883,  in  Hyde  Park,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Robert  Daines  and  Jemima 


Seamons.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old  and  served  in 
various  offices  in  the  Priesthood.  He 
received  his  education  in  the  public 
schools,  later  acquiring  the  following 
degrees:  B.  S.  (from  the  Brigham 
Young  College),  M.  A,  (from  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah),  Ph.  D.  (from  the 
University  of  Calif.),  and  M.  D.  (from 
the  Rush  Medical  College).  He  work- 
ed with  the  famous  bacteriologist, 
Kolmer,  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, spent  two  years  on  the  Thomp- 
son scholarship  in  California,  taught 
at  the  Brigham  Young  College  for 
three  years,  and  has  worked  especially 
in  diseases  pertaining  to  bacteria.  He 
has  one  great  ambition — to  help  a 
little  in  discovering  means  of  elim- 
inating disease  from  the  earth.  He 
has  acted  as  president  of  the  Utah 
State  Academy  of  Science,  of  the 
Board  of  Trustees  of  the  State  School 
for  the  Deaf  and  Blind,  is  a  member 
of  six  honorary  societies  and  a  fac- 
ulty member  of  the  Athletic  Council 
of  the  University  of  Utah. 

DONE,  Willard,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1898  to  1917,  died  Jan.  10,  1931.  (See 
Biographical  Encyclopedia  Vol.  1,  p. 
716.) 

DOUGALL,  William  B.,  jun.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  from  1902  to  1906,  was  born  May 
7,  1869,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  William  B.  Dougall  and  Maria 
Young.  He  was  baptized  in  1877,  was 
manager  of  the  Deseret  Telegraph 
Company,  worked  on  the  Deseret 
News  staff,  filled  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land in  1892-1893,  and  was  an  expert 
pianist.     He  died  April  10,   1906. 

EARDLEY,      Roscoe      Woolley,      a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1913  to  1922,  was 
born  Feb.  13,  1880,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  James  Walter  Eard- 
ley  and  Catherine  Adella  Woolley.  He 
was  baptized   June  8,   1888,  ordained 


236 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


a  Seventy  Oct.  13,  1899,  by  George 
Reynolds,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Netherlands  in  1899-1901.  He  filled 
a  second  mission  to  the  Netherlands 
in  1911-1913,  as  mission  president. 

ELLSWORTH,  German  E.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
L  A.,  from  1922  to  1935.  (See  Presi- 
dents of  Missions.) 

ENSIGN,  Horace  Samuel,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  and  assistant  musical  director 
of  that  orjranization  from  1899  to 
1909,  was  born  Nov.  10,  1871,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Horace  So- 
beski  Ensign  and  Martha  Triplet.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  18,  1879,  ordained 
a  Seventy  June  2,  1897,  by  Jonathan 
G.  Kimball,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Colorado  in  1897-1899.  He  also  filled 
a  mission  to  Japan  in  1901-1905.  For 
many  years  he  was  a  member  of  the 
Tabernacle  Choir  and  made  several 
trips  with  that  organization  as  a  solo- 
ist. Later  he  made  his  home  in  Wichi- 
ta, Kansas,  where  he  still  resided  in 
1936. 

ERICKSEN,  Ephraim  Edward,  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1922  to  1935,  was 
born  Jan.  2,  1882,  at  Logan,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Bendt  Jensen  Eiicksen  and 
Anna  Sophia  Danielson.  He  was  edu- 
cated in  the  public  schools  of  Preston, 
Idaho,  received  an  A.  B.  degree  at  the 
Brigham  Young  College  at  Logan, 
Utah,  in  1908,  and  the  degree  of  Ph. 
D.  at  the  University  of  Chicago  in 
1918.  He  was  principal  of  the  Mur- 
dock  Academy  in  1911-1915,  professor 
and  chairman  of  the  Department  of 
Philosophy  at  the  University  of  Utah 
in  1918,  and  taught  summer  school 
at  several  other  universities  and  at 
the  Utah  State  Agricultural  College 
and  is  now  Professor  of  Philosophy 
at  the  University  of  Utah.  He  is  the 
author  of  a  number  of  books,  includ- 
ing "Psychological  and  Ethical  As- 
pects   of    Mormon    Group    Life"    and 


"Social  Ethics,"  and  of  the  M.  I.  A. 
Manuals,  "Challenging  Problems  of 
the  Twentieth  Century"  and  "Youth 
and  His  Social  Problems."  Dr.  Erick- 
sen  is  1st  vice  president  of  the  Utah 
Educational  Association,  a  member 
of  the  American  Philosophical  Asso- 
ciation and  of  the  Administrative 
Council  of  the  University  of  Utah, 
and  chairman  of  the  Utah  Coun- 
cil for  the  Prevention  of  War.  On 
June  8,  1910,  he  married  Edna  Clark 
of  Farmington,  Utah.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  four  sons, 
namely,  Stanford  Clark,  Sheldon 
Danielson,  Ephraim  Gordon  and 
Howard  Bendt,  and  one  daughter, 
Edna  Margaret.  Dr.  Ericksen  holds 
the  office  of  a  High  Priest  and  is  es- 
pecially active  in  the  interest  of  the 
youth  of  the  Church. 

EVANS,  Richard  L.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
since  1935,  was  born  March  23,  1906, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  LItah,  a  son  of  John 
A.  Evans  and  Florence  Neslen.  He  was 


baptized  May  2,  1914,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1926-1929,  and  has 
labored  faithfully  and  diligently  in 
Church  activities.  His  father  died 
when  he  was  10  weeks  old,  leaving  his 
mother  with  nine  children.    From  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


237 


youth  Richard  was  made  familiar  with 
the  realities  of  life,  and  learned  early 
through  intelligent  service  how  to 
earn  his  own  way  through  life.  He 
was  appointed  managing  editor  of 
the  "Improvement  Era"  in  April,  1935, 
and  fills  that  position  with  a  rich 
background  of  efficient  Church  sei'vice 
and  wide  experience  in  business,  edu- 
cation and  editorial  fields.  He  mar- 
ried Alice  Ruth  Thoi-nley  who  bore 
him  one  son,  Richard  L.  jun.  Elder 
Evans  has  written,  produced  and  an- 
nounced the  coast-to-coast  radio  net- 
work program  from  the  Salt  Lake 
Tabernacle  since  June,  1930.  He  re- 
ceived an  A.  B.  degree  from  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  in  1931  and  an  M.  A. 
degree  in  1932.  During  his  mission  to 
Great  Britain  he  acted  as  associ- 
ate editor  of  the  "Millennial  Star" 
under  Dr.  James  E.  Talmage  and  Dr. 
John  A.  Widtsoe,  and  as  secretary  of 
the  European  Mission.  He  accompa- 
nied the  Tabernacle  Choir  to  the  San 
Diego  Exposition  as  radio  announcer, 
and  also  to  Winter  Quarters  in  Sep- 
tember, 1936,  at  the  dedication  of  the 
monument,  as  radio  announcer.  He 
was  given  the  distinction  of  being  the 
announcer  over  the  radio  with  the 
clearest  diction.  Bro.  Evans  is  in- 
dustrious, intelligent  and  sympathetic, 
is  a  lover  of  truth  and  beauty,  and, 
above  all,  he  understands  and  prac- 
tices the  principles  of  the  restored 
Gospel.  He  has  acquired  his  educa- 
tion by  persistent  effort  of  his  own, 
having  worked  at  numerous  occupa- 
tions in  order  to  attain  his  present 
efficiency. 

EYRE,  Ployed  G.,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  since 
1935,  was  born  Sept.  9,  1895,  in  Mi- 
nersville,  Utah,  a  son  of  Edwin  Eyre, 
jun.,  and  Arilla  Guyman.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  8,  1905,  by  Moroni 
Myers,  functioned  in  offices  of  the 
Aaronic  Priesthood,  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Oct.  17,  1920,  by  Alonzo  A. 
Hinckley  and  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia during  the  summer  of  1926.  In 


1918  during  the  World  war  he  served 
as  a  volunteer  in  the  U.  S.  Navy.  In 
1923  he  graduated  from  the  Brigham 
Young   Academy,  with  the  degree   of 


B.  S.,  after  which  he  was  principal  of 
the  San  Luis  Stake  Academy.  Since 
that  time  his  work  has  been  largely 
confined  to  the  charge  of  Latter-day 
Saint  Seminaries;  he  has  been  prin- 
cipal of  the  Seminary  at  Hinckley, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1925,  and  from 
that  time  to  the  present,  principal  of 
the  Weber  Academy  in  Ogden,  Utah. 
On  July  16,  1917,  he  married  LaPriel 
Robinson  of  Hinckley.  Four  children 
have  been  born  of  this  marriage, 
namely,  Arilla,  Rama,  Luana  and  Lael. 

FARNSWORTH,    Burton    Kent,    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  since  1935,  was  born  March 
6,  1890,  at  Beaver  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Franklin  D.  Farnsworth  and  Me- 
leci  While.  He  was  baptized  July  7, 
1898,  by  S.  0.  White,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Samoa  from  19^9  to  1912,  la- 
boring part  of  the  time  as  secretary 
of  the  mission  and  as  president  of  the 
Upolu  Conference.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Apostle  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  after  being  ordained  a 


238 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Bishop  by  Pres.  David  0.  McKay  he 
presided  over  the  Fillmore  1st  Ward 
from  1928  to  1931.  Elder  Farnsworth 
began  teaching  in  Montpelier,  Idaho, 
in  1912,  and  is  now  professor  of  edu- 
cation at  the  Utah  State  Agricultural 
College.  He  secured  the  degrees  of 
B.  S.  and  M.  A.  at  the  Utah  State 
Agricultural  College,  and  the  degree 
of  Ed.  D.  at  the  University  of  Cali- 
fornia (Berkeley)  in  1933.  On  Oct.  3, 
1913,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple,  Bro. 
Farnsworth  married  Mabel  Pearce  of 
Montpelier.  Six  children  have  been 
born  to  them,  namely,  Lucille,  Dean 
Burton,  Margaret  Agnes,  Patty  Linn, 
Robert  Pearce  and  Richard   Kent. 

FARNSWORTH,  Philo  T.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  was  born  May  17,  1900,  in  Manti, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Moses  Franklin  Farns- 
worth and  Clai-a  Canfield.  He  was 
baptized  May  19,  1908,  by  Warren 
Cox,  ordained  to  offices  in  the  Aaron- 
ic  Priesthood  and  ordained  an  Elder 
in  May,  1923,  by  Wilbur  J.  Maw.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  September, 
1929,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard  and  a  High 
Priest  in  September,  1930,  by  Rudger 
Clawson.  He  served  as  president  of  a 
Deacons'  Quorum,  and  of  a  Teachers' 
Quorum,  taught  in  Sunday  School, 
served  as  scoutmaster  in  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  a  member  of  the  Sunday 
School  Boards  of  the  Grant  and  Gran- 
ite Stakes,  a  counselor  in  the  bishop- 
ric of  the  Miller  Ward  from  1930  to 
1932,  a  member  of  the  High  Council 
of  the  Grant  Stake  and  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  since 
1934,  laboring  on  the  scouting  com- 
mittee. Elder  Farnsworth  is  an  edu- 
cator by  profession,  graduated  from 
the  Brigham  Youn^r  University  in 
1926  with  the  degree  of  B.  S.;  and  a 
year  later  took  the  degree  of  M.  S. 
from  the  same  institution  and  is  now 
(1936),  in  New  York  attending  the 
Teachers  College  at  Columbia  Univer- 
sity for  a  Ph.  D.  degree.  On  July 
16,  1926,  he  married  Agnes  Bingham 


in  the  Logan  Temple.  This  marriage 
has  been  blessed  with  two  children, 
namely,  Don  Philo  and  Claire  Etta. 
In  1930  Elder  Farnsworth  was  ap- 
pointed chairman  of  leadership  train- 
ing of  the  Salt  Lake  Council  of  Boy 
Scouts  of  America  and  has  been  en- 
gaged in  Boy  Scout  work  for  the  past 
twenty-two  years.  In  January,  1936, 
he  received  the  Silver  Beaver  Award 
for  distinguished  service  to  boyhood. 

GATES,  Brigham  Cecil,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  from  1918  to  1929,  was  born  Aug. 
17,  1887,  in  Laie,  Oahu,  Hawaii,  the 
son  of  Jacob  F.  Gates  and  Susa  Young. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  17,  1895,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
1907-1910,  was  director  of  the  music 
department  of  the  Latter-day  Saints 
College,  director  of  music  at  the  Utah 
Agricultural  College,  assistant  leader 
of  the  Tabernacle  choir  and  the  first 
director  of  the  McCune  School  of  Mu- 
sic in  Salt  Lake  City. 

GILES,  John  D.,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  since 


1928,  was  born  Aug.  1,  1883,  a  son  of 
Henry  E.  Giles  and  Catherine  Evans. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


239 


He  studied  at  the  Brigham  Young 
University,  and  after  working  in  the 
business  office  of  the  Deseret  News 
for  five  years  established  an  advertis- 
ing agency,  the  first  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  He  was  for  fifteen  years  super- 
intendent of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
Ensign  Stake.  He  helped  to  establish 
the  fathers  and  sons  outings  and  the 
"M"  Men's  movement.  He  has  de- 
voted the  past  eighteen  years  to  boy 
scout  work  and  is  chairman  of  the  or- 
ganization committee  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Boy  Scout  Council.  He  is  executive 
secretary  of  the  Utah  Pioneer  Trails 
and  Landmarks  Association  and  sec- 
retary of  the  Oregon  Trail  Associa- 
tion. He  has  photographed  scenes 
along  nearly  all  of  the  Mormon  Pio- 
neer Route  from  Nauvoo  to  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  gathered  history  for  the 
erection  of  a  large  number  of  monu- 
ments erected  along  historic  trails 
and  sites  connected  with  the  history 
of  the  Church  and  the  development 
of  the  Western  States.  He  is  the  au- 
thor of  a  number  of  magazine  articles 
relating  to  these  subjects. 

GODDARD,  Benjamin,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1903  to  1929,  was  born  July  27, 
1851,  in  Kuddersfield,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Joshua  Goddard  and 
Mary  Ruth  Williamson.  He  came  to 
Utah  in  1879,  was  baptized  May  8, 
1879,  filled  two  missions  to  New  Zea- 
land and  acted  as  president  of  the 
mission  for  a  time.  He  was  head  of 
the  Bureau  of  Information,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  for  twenty-seven  years, 
and  died  Dec.  5,  1930. 

GRANT,  Benjamin  F.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
from  1900  to  1925,  was  born  Oct.  17, 
1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Jedediah  Morgan  Grant  and  Mary- 
etta  Kesler.  He  was  an  infant  at  the 
time  of  his  father's  death,  and  his  boy- 
hood was  spent  in  the  home  of  his 
grandparents,  Frederick  and  Emeline 


Parker  Kesler,  and  partly  in  the  home 
of  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  His  early 
educational  advantages  were  limited, 
and  he  went  to  Montana,  where  he 
worked  in  the  mines  and  sawmills. 
He  served  as  chief  of  police  of  Salt 
Lake  City  from  1913  to  1917,  was  su- 
perintendent of  the  Latter-day  Saints 
Hospital  for  ten  years,  and  manager 
of  the  Deseret  News  for  some  time. 
Bro.  Grant  was  baptized  when  forty 
years  of  age,  and  married  Johannah 
Schulter.  He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Aug.  30,  1936. 

GRANT,  Heber  J.,  first  general  as- 
sistant superintendent  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  serving  from  1898  to  1918.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  1,  p.  147,  and  Vol.  3, 
p.  746.) 

HAMMOND,  Datus  E.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
since  1931,  was  born  Jan.  13,  1887,  in 
Millville,  Utah,   the  son   of  Datus   R. 


Hammond  and  Sarah  Gamble.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  22,  1895,  and  educated 
in  the  public  schools  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  the  University  of  Utah.  For 
ten  months  (in  1906-1907)  he  filled  a 
mission  in  England;  during  the  World 
war,  he  was  commissioned  a  second 
lieutenant  and  became  personnel  ad- 


240 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


jutant  in  the  officers  training  school 
at  Camp  Grant,  111.,  and  at  the  close 
of  the  war  was  ranked  as  a  first  lieu- 
tenant. He  has  been  active  in  the 
boy  scout  organization  for  fourteen 
years,  and  for  six  years  has  been  an 
executive  of  the  Salt  Lake  City  Coun- 
cil. He  married  Bertha  H.  Hansen 
who  bore  five  children,  viz..  Norma, 
Arline,  Virginia,  Jeanne  and  Lois. 

HARDY,  Milton  H.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1898  to  1905,  was  born  Sept.  26, 
1844,  in  Bradford,  Essex  Co.,  Mass.,  a 
son  of  Josiah  G.  Hardy  and  Sarah  C. 
Parker.  He  came  to  Utah  and  was 
baptized  Oct.  17,  1852.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  the  United  States  in  1871- 
1873,  and  in  1875  was  called  on  a  spe- 
cial mission  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
to  accompany  his  son  B.  Morris 
Young  and  John  Henry  Smith  on  a 
tour  to  organize  Young  Men's  Mutual 
Improvement  Associations  in  all  the 
wards  and  settlements  throughout  the 
stakes  of  Zion.  In  this  mission  these 
brethren  were  very  successful.  In 
1876  Elder  Hardy  married  Libbie 
Smoot  and  they  had  five  children.  He 
died  Aug.  23,  1905. 

HARRIS,  Franklin  Stewart,  presi- 
dent of  the  Brigham  Young  Univer- 
sity   and    a    member    of    the    General 


Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  since  1923, 
was  born  Aug.  29,  1884,  at  Benjamin, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Dennison  Emer  Harris 


and  Eunice  Stewart.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  1,  1892,  by  John  Allen,  and  as 
the  family  located  at  Colonia  Juarez, 
Chihuahua,  Mexico,  soon  afterwards, 
ho  was  ordained  to  offices  of  the 
Aaronic  Priesthood  there;  he  also 
acted  as  secretary  of  the  ward  and 
stake  M.  I.  A.  and  served  in  many 
other  Church  activities.  Returning 
to  Utah  about  1905,  he  became  an  in- 
structor in  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 
Brigham  Young  University.  For  ten 
years  he  was  a  faculty  member  of 
the  Utah  Agricultural  College,  and 
for  five  years  head  of  the  experi- 
mental station  of  that  school,  having 
taken  out  his  Ph.  D.  at  Cornell  Uni- 
versity. Since  1921  he  has  presided 
over  the  Brigham  Young  University. 
In  1926  he  labored  as  a  missionary  in 
Japan  and  in  1927  was  called  on  a 
special  mission  among  the  Saints  in 
Syria.  In  1929  Dr.  Harris  responded 
to  a  special  invitation  to  direct  an  ex- 
pedition to  help  colonize  Jews  in  Si- 
beria. He  is  the  author  of  several 
books,  including  one  entitled  "The 
Young  Man  and  His  Vocation,"  and 
about  two  hundred  scientific  papers 
and  bulletins.  He  is  a  member  of  a 
number  of  scientific  and  professional 
societies  at  home  and  abroad.  On 
June  18,  1908,  he  married  Estella 
Spilsbury  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
Six  children  have  blessed  this  mar- 
riage, namely,  Franklin  S.  jun.,  Ar- 
lene,  Chauncey  D.,  Helen,  Leah  D., 
and  Mildred. 

HART,  Charles  H.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1926  to  1934,  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sept.  29,  1934.  (See  Bio.  Ency. 
Vol.  3,  p.  748.) 

HILL,  George  R.,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1926  to  1935.  (See  Sunday  School 
Group.) 

HINCKLEY,  Bryant  S.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  from  1900  to  1925.  (See  Bio.  Ency. 
Vol.  1,  p.  778.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENYLOPEDIA 


241 


HORSLEY,  Ernest  Preston,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.,  from  1919  to  1935,  was  born 
May  19,  1875,  in  Three  Mile  Creek, 
Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Horsley  and  Elizabeth  Welch. 
He  was  baptized  in  April,  1883,  or- 
dained a  Seventy,  Nov.  12,  1897,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1897-1899. 

HULL,  Thomas,  secretary-treasurer 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.  from  1898  to  1905,  died  Jan.  3,  1935. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  1,  p.  716.) 

IVERSON,  Heber  C,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1922  to  1935,  was  born  July  1, 
1868,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Soren  Iverson  and  Caroline 
Monson.  He  was  baptized  July  1, 
1876,  served  as  Bishop  of  the  2nd 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  from  1899  to 
1919,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  from  1919  to  1922. 
(See  also  Presidents  of  Missions.) 

IVINS,  Anthony  W.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1909  to  1929,  and  general  super- 
intendent from  1919  to  1921,  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  27,  1934.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  1,  p.  311,  and  Vol.  3, 
p.  7.50.) 

KELSCH,  Louis  A.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1905  to  1909,  was  born  Nov.  28, 
1856,  in  Vinningen,  Germany,  the  son 
of  Louis  Kelsch  and  Saraphine  Kelsch. 
He  came  to  Utah  when  he  was  nine 
years  old,  was  baptized  Oct.  25,  1877, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States,  acting  as  president  of  that 
mission  from  1896  to  1901.  He  also 
filled  a  mission  to  Japan  in  1901-1902, 
and  died  Oct.  16,  1917. 

KIEPE,  August  Friedrich  Werner, 
a  member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  May  13,  1900, 
in  Schwelm,  Germany,  the  son  of 
Friedrich  W.  Kiepe  and  Elfrieda  Mey- 
er.   He  came  to  America  in  1907,  was 


baptized  in  1909,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1919-1922. 
He  served  as  president  of  the  Wanda- 
mere  Ward  M.  I.  A.  in  1924,  labored 
on  the  Grant  Stake  M  Men  Commit- 
tee, and  was  graduated  from  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  school  of  business  with 
an  A.  B.  degree.  He  married  Karine 
H.  Widtsoe,  daughter  of  Osborne  J. 
P.  and  Rose  Homer  Widtsoe,  and  they 
have  two  children,  Werner  Widtsoe 
and  Barbara  Karine.  In  1927  he  acted 
as  executive  secretary  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Real  Estate  Board,  which  position  he 
now  (1936)  holds,  together  with  the 
secretaryship  of  the  Utah  State  Re- 
alty Association  and  the  Apartment 
House  Association  of  Utah. 

KIMBALL,     Jonathan     Golden,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1898  to  1922.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  1,  p.  216.) 

KIRKHAM,  Oscar  Ammon,  execu- 
tive secretary  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
since  1909,  was  born  Jan.  22,  1880,  in 


Lehi,  Utah,  the  son  of  James  Kirk- 
ham  and  Martha  Mercer.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  1,  1888,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Germany  in  1900-1903.  He 
graduated   from   the   Brigham   Young 


Vol.   IV.  No.   16 


April   18,  1936 


242 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


University  in  Provo,  Utah,  studied 
music  in  Berlin,  Germany  and  taught 
school  in  the  Latter-day  Saints  Uni- 
versity. He  is  executive  of  Re- 
gion 12,  Boy  Scouts  of  America. 
During  the  International  Boy  Scout 
Jamboree,  held  at  Arrowe  Park,  Bir- 
kenhead, England,  in  1929,  he  was  a 
member  of  the  national  staff,  was  gen- 
eral morale  officer  and  member  of  the 
program  committee,  and  had  charge 
of  the  religious  exercises  of  the  Amer- 
ican scouts  and  assisted  in  the  gen- 
eral supervision  of  the  American  con- 
tingent. 

LUND,  Ant  Hon  H.,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1909  to  1918,  died  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
March  2,  1921.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  161,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  753.) 

LUND,  Henry  C,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1912-1925,  died  Sept.  5,  1925.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  780.) 

LYMAN,  Francis  Marion,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  from  1898  to  1916,  died  Nov.  16. 
1916.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  136, 
and  Vol.  3,  p.  755.) 

LYMAN,  Richard  R.,  first  general 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  from  1919  to  1934.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  756.) 

MABEY,  Charles  R.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1925  to  1935.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  4,  p.  154.) 

MADSEN,  Axel  A.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
since  1922,  was  born  March  5,  1893, 
in  Salem,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  Hans  Madsen  and  Martha  J.  Soren- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  June  28,  1901, 
ordained  a  Deacon  March  5,  1905,  by 
Bishop  James  H.  Gardner,  ordained 
a  Teacher  Dec.  2,  1907,  by  Wm.  F. 
Gurney   and   ordained   a   Priest    Feb. 


10,  1908,  by  Bishop  James  H.  Gard- 
ner. These  ordinations  occurred  in 
the  Lehi  2nd  Ward  of  the  Alpine 
Stake.      During    the    World    war,    he 


went  over  seas  with  the  362nd  In- 
fantry of  the  91st  Division,  arriving 
at  the  front  in  time  for  the  first  dis- 
tinctive American  drive  at  St.  Mihiel 
and  later  in  the  Argonne  and  in  Flan- 
ders with  the  French  armies  under 
command  of  King  Albert  of  Belgium, 
who  personally  decorated  the  colors 
of  the  362nd  Infantry  on  the  occasion 
of  his  triumphal  re-entry  of  Brussels. 
As  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  362nd  In- 
fantry Association,  organized  in 
France  before  the  regiment  returned 
home,  he  presented  to  the  State  of 
Utah  on  the  occasion  of  Utah's  offi- 
cial "Welcome  Home"  to  all  of  its  sol- 
diers, Oct.  8,  1919,  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Tabernacle,  the  colors  of  the  regiment 
which  were  accepted  by  Governor 
Bamberger  in  behalf  of  the  State  of 
Utah,  who  promised  they  would  be 
preserved  as  an  honored  symbol  of 
the  service  rendered  by  this  regiment, 
which  had  in  it  the  only  large  body 
of  Utah's  sons  who  saw  service  at 
the  front  during  the  great  World  war. 
Elder  Madsen  served  as  a  missionary 
in  California  from  January  6,  1920  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


243 


April  3,  1922.  Immediately  upon  re- 
turning from  this  mission  he  was 
called  to  the  Temple  Block  Mission 
and  served  there  seven  years  until 
May,  1929,  when  he  organized  the 
Axel  A.  Madsen  Company  to  engage 
in  the  Real  Estate  and  Insurance  Busi- 
ness. He  was  chosen  as  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Young 
Men's  Mutual  Improvement  Associa- 
tion immediately  upon  his  return  from 
missionary  work  in  California  in  April, 

1922.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  8,  1926,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant 
and  appointed  Bishop  of  the  Ensign 
Ward  of  the  Ensign  Stake  on  that  date. 
He    married    Emily    Grant,    Oct.    17, 

1923.  Before  her  death,  July  31,  1929, 
three  sons  were  born,  namely,  Grant 
Wells,  born  Sept.  13,  1924;  Truman 
Grant,  born  Dec.  13,  1926,  and  Gordon 
Axel,  born  July  3,  1929. 

McKAY,  James  Gunn,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1922  to  1935,  was  born  April 
9,  1881,  in  Huntsville,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Angus  McKay  and  Williamena  Mc- 
Kay. He  was  baptized  April  29,  1889, 
ordained  a  Seventy,  Sept.  7,  1906,  by 
Rulon  S.  Wells,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  South  Africa  in  1906-1909. 

McMURRIN,  Joseph  W.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I. 
A.,  died  in  Los  Angeles,  California, 
Oct.  24,  1932.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  216.) 

MARTINEAU,  Lyman  R.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  from  1905  to  1926,  died  Jan.  4, 
1926.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  677.) 

MAW,  Herbert  B.,  a  member  of  the 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1927  to  1935.  (See 
Sunday  School  Group.) 

MAYCOCK,  Philip  S.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1903  to  1907,  was  born  May  23, 
1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 


of  Bishop  Thomas  Maycock  and  Louisa 
Starkey.  He  graduated  from  the  pub- 
lic schools  of  Salt  Lake  City,  and  later 
attended  the  Latter-day  Saints  Col- 
lege. He  filled  a  mission  to  Germany 
and  Turkey,  presiding  over  the  mis- 
sion in  Turkey  from  1897  to  1899. 
After  his  return,  he  graduated  from 
the  Ann  Arbor  Law  School,  Michigan, 
and  was  chosen  second  counselor  to 
Pres.  Hugh  J.  Cannon  at  the  organ- 
ization of  the  Liberty  Stake.  He  was 
a  clear  thinker,  honest,  sincere,  pa- 
triotic, loyal  and  had  a  fine  sense  of 
justice.  He  died  March  21,  1907,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

MERRILL,     Harrison      Reuben,     a 

member  of  thv.  General  Board  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  from  1932  to  1936,  was 
born  Nov.  13,  1884,  in  Smithfield, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Orrin  Jackson  Merrill 
and  Elizabeth  White.  He  was  baptized 
May  20,  1893,  by  his  father  and  spent 
his  boyhood  at  Mapleton,  Idaho,  where 
he  went  through  the  grade  school.  In. 
summer,  when  he  became  a  little  older, 
he  herded  sheep  and  worked  in  saw 
mills  of  the  region;  had  high  school 
training  at  the  Oneida  Academy,  at 
Preston,  Idaho;  also  studied  at  the 
University  of  Idaho,  Moscow,  in  1906- 
1907.  He  married  Edna  Johnson  Jan. 
27,  1909,  and  left  for  a  mission  to  Ire- 
land in  April  of  the  same  year.  He 
returned  in  1911  and  taught  in  the 
Preston  grade  schools;  later,  taught 
English  at  the  Oneida  Academy,  and 
took  his  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Science 
at  the  Utah  State  Agricultural  Col- 
lege, Logan,  in  1916;  was  manager  of 
the  Franklin  County  Citizen;  went  to 
Provo  to  teach  at  the  Brigham  Young 
University  in  1921,  and  has  held  posi- 
tions at  that  same  institution  until  the 
present  time,  viz.,  publicity  director; 
acting  director  of  Extension  Division; 
professor  of  journalism;  head  of  jour- 
nalism department;  director  of  Exten- 
sion Division  and  chairman  of  publi- 
city committee.  He  studied  at  North- 
western University,  Evanston,  111.,  in 


244 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


1927,  and  at  Columbia  University  in      8,  1908,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
1929-1930,  where  he  took  his  degree      by  Rudger  Clawson  and  on  June  21, 


of  Master  of  Sciences  in  journalism. 
He  has  held  the  following  ecclesiasti- 
cal positions:  Bishop  of  the  Preston 
3rd  Ward,  Idaho;  high  council  mem- 
ber, Oneida  Stake,  Preston,  Idaho; 
first  counselor  in  the  Oneida  Stake 
Presidency;  counselor  in  the  High 
Priests'  quorum,  Utah  Stake,  Provo, 
Utah;  managing  editor  of  "Improve- 
ment Era"  for  four  years,  and  chair- 
man of  Arts  and  Letters  section  of 
Utah  Academy  of  Sciences,  Arts  and 
Letters. 

MERRILL,  Joseph  F.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1927  to  1933.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  784.) 

MORGAN,    Nicholas    Groesbeck,    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1912  to  1935,  was 
born  Nov.  9,  1884,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  Morgan  and 
Helen  M.  Groesbeck.  He  attended  the 
public  schools,  University  of  Utah, 
and  graduated  from  the  law  course  of 
Georgetown  University,  at  Washing- 
ton, D.  C.  in  1910,  after  which  he  prac- 
ticed law  in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  mar- 
ried Ethel  S.  Tate,  Jan.  8,  1909,  and 
they  have  four  children,  viz.,  Dorothy, 
Helen,  Marjorie  and  Nicholas  Groes- 
beck, jun. 

MORRIS,  George  Q.,  first  assistant 
general  superintendent  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  since  1935,  was  born  Feb.  20,  1874, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  son  of  Elias  Mor- 
ris and  Mary  Lois  Walker.  He  was 
baptized  Feb.  28,  1882,  by  John  Cot- 
tam,  officiated  in  offices  of  the  Aaronic 
Priesthood  and  was  ordained  an 
Elder  April  13,  1896  by  Andrew  S. 
Gray.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Sept.  13,  1899,  by  Geo.  Teasdale  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1899-1902,  during  which  he  presided 
over  the  London  Conference  after  la- 
boring one  year  in  Wales.  On  Mar. 
1914,  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and   set 


apart  to  preside  over  the  Fourteenth 
Wai'd,  Salt  Lake  City,  which  position 

he  held  until   1924,  having  previously 


acted  as  first  counselor  in  the  bishop- 
ric six  years.  Elder  Morris  acted  as 
stake  superintendent  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  from  1904  to 
1908,  and  again  from  June  1913  to 
June  1914.  He  was  the  first  superin- 
tendent of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  division 
of  the  Stake  into  four  stakes  in  1904. 
He  moved  into  the  Ensign  Stake  and 
from  1928  to  1935  served  as  a  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Ensign 
Stake.  He  has  been  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  since 
1924  and  on  Jan.  26,  1935,  when  the 
superintendency  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
was  reorganized,  was  appointed  first 
assistant  to  Pres.  A.  E.  Bowen.  Bro. 
Morris  is  president  and  manager  of  the 
Elias  Morris  and  Sons  Company, 
established  by  his  father,  with  which 
firm  he  has  been  associated  from  his 
youth.  He  is  also  active  in  civic  en- 
terprises, being  an  officer  in  the  Com- 
munity  Chest   and    a   director    of   the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


245 


Traveler's  Aid  Society. 

On  June  29,  1905,  Elder  Morris  mar- 
ried Emma  Ramsey,  (daughter  of 
Geo.  W.  Ramsey  and  Amanda  Ross)  a 
talented  musician.  Three  daughters 
have  been  born  to  them,  namely, 
Marian,  Margery  and  Helen.  (See  also 
Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p. 
367.) 

MORRIS,  Nephi  L.,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1898  to  1912.  (See  Biographical  En- 
cyclopedia, Vol.  1,  p.  639.) 

NELSON,  J.  Edwin,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  in 
1936,  was  born  July  8,  1896,  in  Mink 
Creek,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Lars  C.  Nelson 
and  Anna  M.  Peterson.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  8,  1904,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Western  States  in  1916-1919,  mar- 
ried Ruth  Mathews  in  1922,  with  whom 
he  had  three  children,  viz.,  Betty 
Alaire,  Shirley  and  Sharon.  He  re- 
ceived the  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree 
from  the  University  of  Utah,  was  a 
counselor  to  David  J.  Wilson  in  the 
Bishopric  of  the  Ogden  12th  Ward, 
Mt.  Ogden  Stake,  from  1921  to  1936; 
was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Gen- 
eral Board  in  1936,  and  is  president 
and  manager  of  the  Intermountain 
Knitting  Mills  of  Ogden,  Utah. 

NIBLEY,  Preston,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1919  to  1929.  (See  Biographical  En- 
cyclopedia, Vol.  3,  p.  686.) 

PENROSE,  Charles  W.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1912  to  1919,  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  May  16,  1925.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  3,  p.  769.) 

PETERSON,  Arthur  E.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  March  1,  1893,  in  Murray, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Lars  Gustave  Peterson 
and  Ida  Natalia  Ahleen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  9,  1902,  and  was  ordained 


an  Elder  Nov.  22,  1922,  by  Bishop  A. 
M.  Nelson.  He  taught  in  the  public 
schools  from  1911  and  is  now  principal 
of  the  Sandy  Junior  High  School  of 
the  Jordan  District  and  assistant  su- 
perintendent of  the  same  school  dis- 
trict. He  married  Eleanora  Tangwell 
at  Butler,  Utah,  on  July  14,  1915. 
Three  children  have  been  born  of  this 
marriage,  namely,  Burke  Arthur, 
Bruce  William  and  Theodore  Tangwell. 

PETTEGREW,  Alma  Helaman,  gen- 
eral secretary-treasurer  of  the  gen- 
eral board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born 
March  23,  1898,  at  Nephi,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  Helaman  Pettegrew  and 
Mary  Emma  Lewis.  He  was  baptized 
March  31,  1906,  by  his  father  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Switzerland  and 
Germany  from  1922  to  1925.  He  acted 
as  office  secretary  to  the  Salt  Lake 
Council  of  Boy  Scouts  of  America  in 
1921-22  and  has  been  general  secre- 
tary of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  since  March 
13,  1929.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
Adult-Aaronic  Priesthood  Committee 
of  the  University  Ward,  Ensign  Stake. 
On  May  12,  1926,  he  married  Edith 
Merle  Hill  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
This  marriage  has  been  blessed  with 
four  children,  namely  David  Alma, 
Edith  Ann,  Mary  Carolyn  and  Patricia 
June.  Bro.  Pettegrew  is  a  grandson 
of  David  Pettegrew,  chaplain  of  the 
famous  Mormon  Battalion. 

RICHARDS,  Claud,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1912  to  1926.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p.  700.) 

RICHARDS,  Geo.  F.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1913  to  1922,  was  born  Feb.  23, 
1861,  in  Farmington,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Franklin  D.  Richards  and 
Nanny  Longstroth.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  12,  1873,  ordained  an  Elder  by 
his  father  when  only  fifteen  years  old, 
and  received  his  endowments  in  the 
Endowment  House,  Salt  Lake  City.    In 


246 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


1888  he  moved  to  Tooele,  where  he 
became  a  member  of  the  presidency 
of  the  Tooele  Stake  and  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  by  Apostle  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man July  23,  1893,  although  only  31 
years  of  age.  Elder  Richards  was  or- 
dained an  Apostle  April  9,  1906,  by 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith.  He  presided 
over  the  European  Mission  from  1916 
to  1919,  and  since  1921  he  has  been 
president  of  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
On  March  9,  1882,  in  the  Endowment 
House,  he  married  Alice  A.  Robinson, 
daughter  of  Oliver  L.  Robinson  and 
Lucy  Miller,  of  Farmington,  who  has 
borne  him  fifteen  children.  (See  Bio- 
graphical Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  544, 
and  Vol.  3,  p.  772.) 

RICHARDS,  Preston  D.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1913  to  1929.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p.  704.) 

ROBERTS,  Brigham  H.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  L  A.  from  1901  to  1922,  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Sept.  27,  1933.  (See  Bio- 
graphical Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  205.) 

ROBINSON,  Wm.  Oliver,  field  sec- 
retary of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  since  1922,  was  born  Jan.  24, 
1876,  in  Farmington,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Joseph  E.  Robinson  and  Dorothy  Wat- 
son. He  was  baptized  July  27,  1884, 
ordained  a  Seventy,  Feb.  24,  1897,  by 
Geo.  Reynolds,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Colorado   in   1897-1899. 

Bro.  Robinson  was  educated  at  the 
Latter-day  Saints  College  and  in  1909 
took  a  collegiate  degree  from  the 
American  Conservatory  of  Music  in 
Chicago.  In  1922  he  graduated  from 
the  National  Playground  and  Recrea- 
tional School  of  Chicago  and  also  took 
a  special  course  of  instruction  in  the 
Dudley  Buck  School  of  Music  in  New 
York  shortly  afterwards.  He  is  a 
member  of  the  Utah  Academy  of  Arts 
and  of  the  State  Dancing  Masters' 
Association.      He    was    a    member    of 


the  committee  which  wrote  and  pro- 
duced the  great  Latter-day  Saints 
pageant  in  1930,  and  has  written  a 
number  of  musical  compositions,  pag- 
eants and  dramas  and  at  present  is 
field  secretary  and  recreational  activ- 
ity supervisor  for  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
On  June  5,  1899,  he  married  Lucy 
Clark  of  Farmington,  Utah.  They  are 
the  parents  of  three  sons  and  three 
daughters,  namely,  Joseph,  Lamond, 
Kenneth  C,  Afton,  Dorothy  and  Kath- 
erine  Barbara. 

SMITH,  George  Albert,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1904  to  1934,  and  general  super- 
intendent from  1921  to  1934.  (See 
Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  3,  p. 
776.) 

SMITH,  Hyrum  Gibbs,  presiding  pa- 
triarch and  a  member  of  the  General 
Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  died  Feb.  4, 
1932.  (See  Biographical  Encyclopedia, 
Vol.  3,  p.  778.) 

SMITH,  Hyrum  M.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1901  to  1918,  died  Jan.  23,  1918. 
(See  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
1,  p.  772,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  779.) 

SMITH,  John  Henry,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1898  to  1911,  died  Oct.  13,  1911. 
(See  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
1,  p.   141,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  780.) 

SMITH,  Joseph  Fielding,  first  as- 
sistant general  superintendent  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1880  to  1901  and  gen- 
eral superintendent  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1901  to  1918,  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Nov.  19,  1918.  (See  Biographi- 
cal Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  66.) 

SMITH,  Joseph  Fielding,  jun.,  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  from  1903  to  1919.  (See  Bio- 
graphical Encyclopedia,  Vol.  3,  p.  784.) 

SMITH,    Joseph    Fielding    (III),    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  since  1929,  was  born  Jan.  30, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYLOPEDIA 


247 


1899,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Hyrum  M.  Smith  and  Ida  Elizabeth 
Bowman.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  30, 
1908,    filled    a    mission    to    Hawaii    in 


1920-1922,  acted  as  professor  of  speech 
at  the  University  of  Utah,  and  is 
now  (1936)  on  leave  of  absence,  study- 
ing at  the  University  of  Wisconsin, 
in  Madison,  Wis. 

SMOOT,  Reed,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1900  to  1912.  (See  Biographical  En- 
cyclopedia, Vol.  1,  p.  178.) 

SNOW,  Leroy  C,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1899  to  1935.  (See  Biographical  En- 
cyclopedia, Vol.  3,  p.  716.) 

SNOW,  Lorenzo,  general  president 
of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from  1898  to  1901, 
died  Oct.  10,  1901.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclodedia,  Vol.  3,  p.   786.) 

SNOW,  Moroni,  general  secretary 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.,  died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Jan. 
18,  1935.  (See  Biographical  Encyclo- 
pedia, Vol.  4,  p.  70.) 

STEPHENS,  Evan,  musical  director 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1898  to  1909,  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Oct.  27,  1930.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.    1,   p.   740.) 


STEVENS,     Stringham     Ashby,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.  since  1929,  was  born  Oct. 
18,  1884,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Jordan  Stevens  and  Maria 
Stringham.     He  was  baptized  Dec.  20, 


1892,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  20, 
1917,  by  Arnold  H.  Schultess,  acted 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Edwin 
S.  Sheets  of  the  33rd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  and  as  first  counselor  to 
Bishop  Charles  E.  Forsberg,  of  the 
33rd  Ward,  from  March  14,  1919,  to 
May  23,  1926.  After  serving  as  a 
member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Liberty  Stake  he  was  sustained  as  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  March 
13,  1929.  On  Oct.  31,  1930,  he  was 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  to  Pres. 
Bryant  S.  Hinckley,  by  Geo.  Albert 
Smith.  He  was  sustained  as  a  member 
of  the  General  Committee  Church 
Security  Program,  May  8,  1936.  In 
1907  (Sept.  5),  he  married  Beatrice  A. 
Farley,  of  which  union  two  children 
were  born,  viz.,  Virginia,  (now  the 
wife  of  Dr.  Hyrum  R.  Reichman),  and 
Robert  S.,  now  a  missionary  in  Great 
Britain.  Elder  Stevens  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Alberta  Stake  (Can- 
ada) Sunday  School  Board  in  1903- 
1904,  and  of  the  Granite  Stake  Sunday 
School    Board    in    1913-1915.     He   has 


248 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


also  filled  other  Church  as  well  as 
secular  positions  of  trust,  and  is  at 
present  publisher  of  the  "Utah  Farm- 
er." 

STEVENSON,  Lester  A.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M. 
I.  A.  since  1936,  was  born  Aug.  10, 
1874,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Edward  Stevenson  and  Emily  Wil- 
liams. He  was  baptized  in  July,  1884, 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  1896  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1896-1899.  He  graduated  from  the 
normal  school  of  the  University  of 
Utah,  in  1901,  acted  as  principal  of  the 
Deseret  public  schools  in  1901  to 
1904,  principal  of  Fillmore  High 
School  in  1904-1906,  and  graduated 
from  Northwestern  University,  Chi- 
cago, in  1910  with  the  degree  of  Doc- 
tor of  Medicine.  He  married  Bertha 
Ester  Starley  Dec.  17,  1902,  which 
union  has  been  blessed  with  the  fol- 
lowing children:  Mourine,  Elaine,  Ver- 
non Lester,  Ronald  Starley,  Elbert, 
Claudius  Edward,  Joseph  Victor,  and 
Betty  Ruth.  Bro.  Stevenson  served  on 
the  Granite  and  Ensign  M.  1.  A. 
Stake  boards  from  1931  to  1936,  and 
was  called  to  the  General  Board  in 
1936.  He  is  a  prominent  physician  of 
Salt  Lake  City. 

TALMAGE,  James  E.,  a  member  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  L  A.  from  1912  to  1922, 
died  July  27,  1933.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  3,  p.  787.) 

TANNER,  Henry  S.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  L  A. 
from  1901  to  1909,  died  May  23,  1935, 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  717.) 

TAYLOR,  Frank  Y.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  L  A, 
from  1899  to  1912.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  563.) 


TAYLOR,  John   Harris,   a   member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  L  A. 


since    1911.     (See   Biographical   Ency- 
clopedia, Vol.  4,  p.  72.) 

TAYLOR,  Moses  W.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1900  to  1912,  died  Jan.  13,  1922. 
(See  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
4,  p.  73.) 

TODD,  Douglas  McLain,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 

from  1898  to  1912,  was  born  Oct. 
31,  1860,  at  Clover  Creek,  Tooele  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  S.  C.  and  Mary 
Todd.  His  boyhood  was  spent  at  St. 
John  and  Grantsville,  and  his  educa- 
tion began  in  a  dugout  across  the 
street  from  his  home  in  St.  John,  with 
Agnes  Taylor  Swartz  as  his  first  in- 
structor. Later  he  studied  with  Dr. 
Karl  G.  Maeser,  and  then  taught 
school.  On  July  13,  1887,  he  married 
Florence  Marian  Driggs,  in  the  Logan 
Temple;  she  was  the  mother  of  two 
childi'en,  and  died  Dec.  7,  1889.  Later 
he  married  Marian  Davis  Lufkin,  who 
died  July  10,  1920,  the  mother  of  10 
children.  His  last  wife  was  Hannah 
N.  McMurray,  mother  of  six  daugh- 
ters. She  also  preceded  her  husband 
in  death.  In  1887  he  was  called  to 
assist  James  M.  Tanner  in  the  B.  Y. 
College  at  Logan;  he  taught  later  in 
the  Rexburg  Academy,  Idaho,  as  prin- 
cipal for  a  number  of  years.  Later 
he  assisted  in  the  establishment  of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


249 


Granite  High  School,  Utah,  where  he 
taug-ht  until  his  health  broke  and  he 
was  forced  to  retire  from  his  profes- 
sion. His  later  years  were  spent  in 
writing-  and  in  research.  He  was  de- 
voted to  the  Church  and  was  an  out- 
standing advocate  of  loyalty  to  the 
Priesthood.  He  died  Dec.  31,  1935,  in 
Alhambra,  California,  leaving  four 
sons  and  fourteen  daughters. 

WARNER,      Homer     Candland,      a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  since  1929,  was  born  Dec.  11, 
1896,  in  Uintah,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  William  A.  Warner  and  Minnie 
Candland.  He  attended  the  public 
schools  and  graduated  from  the  Ogden 
High  School  in  1914,  and  from  the 
University  of  Utah  in  1918  with  an 
A.  B.  degree  in  Commerce  and  Finance. 
He  was  a  2nd  lieutenant  in  the  heavy 
artillery  during  the  World  war,  taught 
school  in  the  Davis  High  School  and 
was  physical  director  at  the  Deseret 
Gymnasium  from  1920  to  1922;  has 
also  worked  in  scouting  and  "M"  Men 
work  and  is  at  present  in  charge  of 
the  athletic  program  for  "M"  men  of 
the  Church.  He  married  Grace  Rich- 
ards, June  16,  1921,  who  has  borne 
him  the  following  children:  Homer, 
Richard,  Emma  Lou,  and  Gill. 

WELLS,  Junius  Free,  the  fiist  or- 
ganizer of  the  Young  Men's  Mutual 
Improvement  Associations  in  the 
Church,  was  born  June  1,  1854,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  a  son  of  Daniel  H.  Wells 
and  Hannah  Free.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old  and  or- 
dained an  Elder  when  quite  a  youth. 
In  1872-1874  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  and  also  visited  the 
Scandinavian  and  the  Swiss  and  Ger- 
man missions  and  made  a  tour  of  other 
parts  of  the  continent  of  Europe.  He 
later  filled  other  missions  in  the  Unit- 
ed States  and  in  Eui-ope.  In  the  first 
week  of  June,  1875,  he  was  called  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  organize  the 
societies  of  the  young  men,  and  he 
effected   the  first  organization   of  the 


Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  as  now  constituted,  in 
the  13th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City  on 
June  10,  1875,  with  Grant  Woolley  as 
president,  B.  Morris  Young  as  first 
counselor  and  Heber  J.  Grant  as  sec- 
ond counselor.  Soon  afterwards.  El- 
der Wells  having  gone  on  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States,  B.  Morris  Young 
was  called  by  his  father  to  visit  all 
the  settlements  of  the  Saints  and  or- 
ganize the  young  men  into  Mutual 
Improvement  Associations.  In  Oc- 
tober, 1879,  Elder  Wells  established 
"The  Contributor,"  a  monthly  maga- 
zine published  in  the  interest  of  the 
Improvement  Associations,  of  which 
he  was  editor  and  publisher  for  thir- 
teen years.  The  "Contributor"  later 
became  the  "Era,"  the  present  organ 
of  the  M.  I.  A.  In  1921,  Elder  Wells 
was  sustained  as  an  Assistant  Church 
Historian.  He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
April  15,  1930.  (See  also  Bio.  Ency. 
Vol.  1,  p.  744.) 

WELLS,  Rulon  S.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1899  to  1929.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  212.) 

WEST,  Franklin  (Lorenzo),  second 
assistant  genei-al  superintendent  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Feb.  1,  1885, 
in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Alva 
and  Josephine  Richards  West.  As  a 
High  Priest,  he  has  served  in  the  Cache 
Stake,  first  as  a  member  of  the  Stake 
Sunday  School  superintendency,  and 
later  as  a  member  of  the  High  Council. 
He  graduated  from  the  Utah  State 
Agricultural  College  in  1904,  then  did 
graduate  work  at  the  Leland  Stanford 
Junior  University  in  California,  which 
was  followed  by  study  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Chicago,  the  latter  granting 
him  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Philosophy 
in  1911.  He  is  the  author  of  a  bio- 
graphy of  his  grandfather  Franklin 
D.  Richards  and  of  a  large  number  of 
scientific  bulletins  and  papers.  He 
served  as  professor  of  physics  at  the 
Brigham  Young  University  in  1905- 
190G,  and   as   professor  of  ])hysics   at 


250 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


the  Utah  State  Agricultural  College  in 
1907-1935,  where  he  was  also  Dean 
of  the  Faculty,  1921-1935.  He  is  a 
fellow  of  the  Utah  Academy  of 
Science,  and  a  fellow  of  the  American 


Meteorological  Society,  the  American 
Physical  Society  a!id  the  American 
Association  for  the  Advancement  of 
Science.  He  is  also  a  member  of  the 
Phi  Kappa  Phi  and  the  Sigma  Xi  hon- 
orary  societies. 

Bro.  West  is  at  present  a  member 
of  the  National  Council  and  also  a 
member  of  the  Personnel  Committee 
of  the  Boy  Scouts  of  America;  second 
assistant  superintendent  of  the  Young 
Men's  Mutual  Improvement  Associa- 
tion of  the  Church,  and  Church  Com- 
missioner of  Education.  From  his 
marriage  with  Violet  Madsen  the  fol- 
lowing children  have  been  boi'n,  name- 
ly: Virginia,  Marjorie,  Franklin  L., 
jun.,  Marion,  Josephine  and  Kathryn. 

WHEELWRIGHT,  D.  Sterling,  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
M.  M.  I.  A.,  assistant  diiector  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Tabernacle  Choir  and  secre- 
tary of  the  General  Music  Committee 


of  the  Church,  was  born  June  27, 
1906,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of  David 
Sterling  Wheelwright  and  Valborg 
Rasmussen.  He  was  baptized  June 
27,  1914,  by  his  father,  ordained  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and  Priest 
and  ordained  an  Elder  and  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  Germany  June  16, 
1925,  by  David  0.  McKay.  En  route  to 
Europe  he  became  seriously  ill  and  re- 
mained in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  for  a 
time  for  medical  treatment.  Failing- 
to  respond  to  remedial  measures,  it 
was  recommended  that  he  return  to 
Utah,  which  he  did  in  charge  of  rela- 
tives, making  the  entire  journey  on  his 
back.  As  soon  as  he  had  recovered 
sufficiently,  he  resumed  college  work 
in  Chicago,  attending  the  Northwest- 
ern University  for  a  time.  While  re- 
siding in  Chicago  for  six  years  he  as- 
sisted the  missionaries  in  every  way 
possible,  especially  in  arranging  musi- 
cal programs,  conducting  choirs,  etc. 
In  1936  he  gave  up  his  school  and 
editorial  affiliations  to  enter  the  em- 
ploy of  the  Church,  assisting  in  the 
development  of  music,  and  now  resides 
in  Salt  Lake  City. 

On  August  18,  1926,  Elder  Wheel- 
wright married  Edna  Cragun  of  Pleas- 
ant View,  Weber  Co.,  Utah;  two  chil- 
dren have  blessed  this  marriage,  name- 
ly:   Carol   Jean    and    David    Richard. 

WIDTSOE,  John  A.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
since  1906.  (See  Biographical  Ency- 
clopedia, Vol.  1,  p.  768,  and  Vol.  3,  p. 

735.) 

WIDTSOE.  Osborne  J.  P.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
died  March  14,  1920.  (See  Biographi- 
cal   Encyclopedia,   Vol.   2,   p.  403.) 

WILLIAMS,  T.  Frank,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
since  1936,  was  born  Nov.  17,  1889,  in 
Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of  Frank  R.  Wil- 
liams and  Lucy  H.  Frost.  He  was 
baptized  in  3  898,  filled  a  mission  to 
the    Swiss-German    Mission    in    1910- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


251 


1913,  and  manned  Luella  Grace  Dean, 
in  January,  1930;  this  union  has  been 
blessed  with  three  boys,  viz:  Dean  Rob- 
ert, Frank  Norville  and  William  Al- 
bert. Bro.  Williams  served  twenty- 
seven  months  in  the  World  war,  one 
year  with  the  War  Prison  Barracks  at 
Fort  Douglas,  and  the  balance  of  the 
time  at  Is-sur-til,  France,  the  advance 
depots  of  the  American  Expeditionary 
forces.  He  has  also  served  in  many 
ecclesiastical  positions  in  the  Ogden 
3rd  Ward  and  the  North  Weber  Stake, 
and  during  the  last  thirteen  years  he 
has  served  as  stake  superintendent  of 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Mt.  Ogden  Stake. 

WINDER,  John  R.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1909  to  1910,  died  March  27, 
1910.  (See  Biographical  Encyclopedia, 
Vol.  1,  p.  244,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  795.) 

WOOD,  Don  Carlos,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1929  to  1934,  was  born  May  3, 
1896,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  Wood,  jun.,  and  Ellen  S. 
Goddard.  He  was  baptized  July  2, 
1904,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  in  1917-1919.  In  1918 
he  served  as  chaplain  of  the  145th 
Utah  Artillery,  stationed  at  Camp 
Lewis,  Tacoma,  Washington,  succeed- 
ing Chaplain  Herbert  Maw  in  that 
position.  Bro.  Wood  was  a  member  of 
the  High  Council  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  before  moving  to  Berkeley,  Cali- 
fornia, and  is  now  a  member  of  the 
Oakland  Stake  High  Council. 

WOODRUFF,     Abraham     Owen,    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  from  1898  to  1904,  died  June 
20,  1904,  at  El  Paso,  Texas.  (See  Bio- 
graphical Encyclopedia,  Vol.  1,  p.  172, 
and  Vol.  3,  p.  796.) 

WOODRUFF,  Wilford,  general  su- 
perintendent of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  from 
1880  to  1898,  died  Jan.  2,  1898,  in 
California.  (See  Biographical  Ency- 
clopedia, Vol.  1,  p.  20.) 


WOODRUFF,     Wilford     Owen,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  from  1931  to  1935,  was  born 
Oct.  31,  1899,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Abraham  Owen  Woodruff 
and  Helen  May  Winters.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1907  and  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  in  1919-1922.  He 
has  been  active  in  furthering  home 
industry  by  advertising  and  marketing 
home  products. 

YOUNG,  Brigham  Morris,  organizer 
of  the  earliest  Mutual  Improvement 
Associations  in  the  Church  under  the 
direction  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
was  born  Jan.  18,  1854,  in  Great  Salt 
Lake,  Utah,  a  son  of  Brigham  Young 
and  Margaret  Pierce.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1862,  studied  under  Dr.  Karl 
G.  Maeser,  helped  on  the  silk  farm  in 
Forest  Dale  and  took  an  active  part  in 
many  other  pioneer  industries  of  the 
State.  From  1873  to  1875  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Hawaiian  Islands  and 
went  again  to  these  islands  as  a  mis- 
sionary in  1883.  In  1875  his  father, 
Pres.  Brigham  Young,  called  him  on  a 
special  mission  to  travel  throughout 
the  stakes  of  Zion  together  with  John 
Henry  Smith  and  Milton  H.  Hai'dy, 
to  organize  Young  Men's  Mutual  Im- 
provement Associations  in  the  differ- 
ent wards  and  settlements.  This  mis- 
sion was  very  successful  and  formed 
the  nucleus  of  the  great  organization 
now  flourishing  throughout  the 
Church.  Bro.  Young  married  Armeda 
Snow,  a  daughter  of  Apostle  Lorenzo 
Snow,  and  i-eared  a  large  family.  He 
died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  Feb.  20, 
1931. 

YOUNG,  Brigham  Spencer,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  from  1917  to  1922.  (See 
Presidents  of  Missions.) 

YOUNG,  Levi  Edgar,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1913  to  1929.  (See  Biographical 
Encyclopedia,  Vol.  3,  p.  798.) 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


YOUNG,  Richard  W.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
from  1898  to  1917,  died  Dec.  27,  1919. 
(See  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
1,  p.  671.) 


GENERAL  BOARD  OF  THE  YOUNG 
WOMAN'S      MUTUAL      IMPROVE- 
MENT ASSOCIATION 

ADAMS,  Emily  Caldwell,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  St.  John,  Tooele 
Co.,  Utah.  She  attended  the  Brigham 
Young  College  in  Logan  and  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah,  served  in  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  presidency  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  and  in  the  ward  presidencies  of 
the  Tooele  Ward  and  the  Salt  Lake 
City  15th  Ward.  In  June,  1899,  she 
married  Thomas  Adams,  who  died  in 
1905.  She  was  called  to  the  General 
Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  1904. 

ANDERSON,  Ethel  Symons,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  Charles  W. 
Symons  and  Arzella  Whittaker.  She 
was  married  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple 
in  1913  to  Gerald  Christian  Anderson, 
a  son  of  Nephi  Anderson,  by  whom 
she  had  one  child,  a  daughter  (Helen), 
and  was  then  left  a  widow  in  1915. 
She  served  in  several  ward  organ- 
izations of  the  10th  Ward,  and  on 
the  Liberty  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
Board  from  1917  to  1926,  when  she 
was  called  to  the  General  Board.  She 
has  been  connected  with  the  music  de- 
partment of  the  Salt  Lake  City  schools 
for  many  years. 

ANDERSON,    Jane    Ballantyne,    a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Feb.  10, 
1861,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  Richard  Ballantyne 
(founder  of  L.  D.  S.  Sunday  schools) 
and  Mary  Peai'ce,  who  emigrated  from 
London.  She  was  educated  in  the 
public  school  at  Eden,  Weber  Co.,  and 
the    private    academy   of   Prof.    L.    F. 


Moench  in  Ogden.  She  taught  school 
from  1879  to  1882  in  the  district  schools 
of  Riverdale,  Uintah  and  Hooper.  On 
June  29,  1882,  she  married  Edward 
H.  Anderson,  and  reared  a  family  of 
six  boys  and  one  girl.  She  served  as 
class  leader  and  member  of  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Ogden  4th  Ward  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.,  as  counselor  and  president 
of  the  Sugar  House  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.,  and  as  a  member  of  the  General 
Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  1908- 
1929. 

BAXTER,  Julia  Strong,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
I.  A.,  was  born  Dec.  31,  1886,  in  Al- 
pine, Utah,  the  daughter  of  Davis  J. 
Strong  and  Martha  Healey.  She  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools  of  the 
Alpine  district  and  the  Brigham  Young 
University,  moved  to  Bear  River  Stake 
where  she  became  active  in  Church 
organizations,  holding  the  position  of 
counselor  in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  stake 
presidency,  acted  as  secretary  of  the 
stake  Primary  organizations,  and  or- 
ganist in  the  Sunday  School  and  Pri- 
mary. Residing  again  in  the  Alpine 
Stake,  she  held  the  position  of  coun- 
selor in  both  ward  and  stake  capac- 
ities and  was  for  five  years  stake  pres- 
ident of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  there,  being 
finally  called  to  the  General  Board  in 
1!'2C.  She  was  married  to  Reuben  E. 
Baxter  in  1909,  and  is  the  mother  of 
thi-ee  sons,  two  of  whom  (Harold  E. 
and  J.  Clifton)   are  living. 

BEESLEY,  Clarissa  A.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  general  presidency  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Ebenezer 
Beesley  and  Annie  Frewin  Buckeridge. 
She  was  baptized  Aug.  4,  1887,  by 
Wm.  Hymas,  at  Liberty,  Idaho,  par- 
ticipated in  the  Salt  Lake  City  16th 
Ward  Church  activities,  particularly 
in  those  of  the  M.  I.  A.;  became  ward 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  at  the 
age  of  seventeen,  and  Ipter  was  made 
stake  secretary  and  stake  president 
of    this    organization.     During    1910- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


253 


1911  she  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States.  Upon  returning  she  was  called 
to  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.,  in  January,  1912.   She  served  as 


general  secretary  from  1914  to  1929, 
as  associate  editor  of  the  "Young 
Woman's  Journal"  from  1914  to  1923, 
and  as  editor  from  1923  to  1929.  In 
April,  1929,  she  was  chosen  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Ruth  May  Fox. 
Sister  Beesley  is  a  graduate  of  the 
University  of  Utah  and  was  a  teacher 
in  the  Salt  Lake  City  schools  until 
called  into  the  general  office  of  the 
M.  I.  A.  in  1914.  She  has  traveled  ex- 
tensively for  the  organization  and  as- 
sisted in  the  preparation  or  editing  of 
most  of  the  M.  I.  A.  publications  dur- 
ing the  past  twenty  years. 

BEESLEY,  Evangeline  Thomas,  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Moroni  J 
Thomas  and  Agnes  Olson.  She  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools,  and  at- 
tended the  L.  D.  S.  University  and 
University  of  Utah;  also  did  consid- 
erable private  work  in  voice  and  meth- 
ods.   She  was  supervisor  of  music  in 


the  Cache  County  schools,  served  as 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  president  in  the  Salt 
Lake  City  24th  Ward,  was  teacher  in 
Primary  and  Sunday  School,  chorister 
in  the  Sunday  School  and  organist  in 
the  M.  I.  A.;  was  called  to  the  General 
Board  in  February,  1922,  served  as 
director  of  music  and  is  a  member  of 
the  Church  Music  Committee.  She  is 
the  wife  of  Pres.  Wilford  A.  Beesley 
and  the  mother  of  four  children:  Bev- 
erly, Virginia,  Wilford  A.,  jun.,  and 
Garratt  Thomas. 

BEELEY,   Glenn   Johnson,   member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
I.    A.,   is    the    daughter    of   Abraham 
Johnson  and  Maribah  Davis,  and  was 
born  at  Moroni,  Utah,  March  13,  1893. 
She  received  a  good  education  and  ob- 
tained her  A.  B.  at  the  Brigham  Young- 
University  in  1915;  later  she  attended 
the  San  Francisco  Art  Institute,  the 
University  of  Chicago,  and  the  Cen- 
tral School  of  Arts  and  Crafts  in  Lon- 
don   (1932-1933),   where   she   went  in 
company  with  her  husband,  who  at- 
tended  the    Oxford    University.      She 
has  been  active  in  auxiliary  work  of 
the   Church,    and    in    1930   was    called 
as  a  member  of  the  General  Board  of 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.    As  a  member  of 
the   Lion   House   Social    Center   Com- 
mittee,  she  assisted  in  plans  for  re- 
modeling and  redecorating  when  the 
building  was  taken  over  by  the  Gen- 
eral Board.    She  has  taught  arts  and 
crafts  at  the  Brigham  Young  Univer- 
sity, the  Emery  Stake  Academy,  the 
Women's  Civic  Center,  the  Lion  House 
Social   Center,  and   is   at   present   di- 
rector of  the  F.  E.  R.  A.  group  in  use- 
ful  handicrafts   at   the   University   of 
Utah.      She  is  the  author  of  a  book 
written  for  the  National  Women's  Re- 
lief  Society,   entitled   "Handcraft   for 
Every  Woman,"  and  also  of  "Utah  In- 
dustries  from   Suggested   Topics   and 
Speakers."     She  was  married    to   Ar- 
thur L.  Beeley,  Prof,  of  Sociology,  at 
the  University  of  Utah,  June  6,  1916, 
and    is    the    mother    of    two    children 
(Mary  and  Stephen  J.). 


254 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


BENNETT,     Rosetta     Wallace,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  Y. 
W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Dec.  12,  1869, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter 
of  Henry  Wallace  and  Elen  Harper. 
She  was  educated  in  the  public  schools, 
the  University  of  Utah  and  the  L.  D. 
S.  University;  was  married  to  John 
F.  Bennett,  Nov.  17,  1897.  She  began 
her  work  in  the  auxiliaries  of  the 
Church  at  thirteen.  In  1895  she  be- 
came a  counselor  in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  presidency  of  the  7th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  was  called  in  1896  to 
the  General  Board.  Sister  Bennett  is 
the  mother  of  five  children:  Wallace 
Foster,  Harold  Harper,  Richard  Sum- 
mers, Elizabeth  Louise  and  Mary. 

BRANDLEY,  Elsie  Talmage,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Aug.  16,  1896,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter 
of  Di-.  James  E.  Talmage  and  May 
Booth  Talmage.  It  isn't  difficult  to 
trace  the  brilliance  of  mind,  great  ca- 
pacity for  work,  vei'satility,  under- 
standing, and  inate  refinement  which 
wei'e  Elsie's  to  her  illustrious  parents. 
She  received  her  education  at  the  L. 
D.  S.  High  School  and  the  Brigham 
Young  University,  where  her  ability 
for  writing  and  her  gift  of  leadership 
were  manifest.  She  graduated  from 
the  B.  Y.  U.  in  1917  and  in  the  fall  of 
that  year  was  married  to  Harold  C. 
Brandley.  To  them  were  born  seven 
daughters,  namely,  Barbara  and  Betty 
(twins).  Norma,  Joyce,  Helen,  Susan 
and  Rosemarie.  She  was  a  worker  in 
the  auxiliary  organizations  of  the 
Church  and  was  called  to  the  General 
Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  March, 
1924,  She  was  associate  editor  of  the 
"Young  Woman's  Journal"  from  1923 
to  1929.  In  1929  when  the  "Journal" 
and  "Improvement  Era"  became  one 
publication  she  was  made  associate 
editor,  which  position  she  held  at  the 
time  of  her  death  Aug.  20,  1935.  She 
assisted  in  the  writing  of  many  manu- 
als and  publications  for  the  Y.  W.  M. 


I.  A.  Due  to  her  unusual  ability  as  a 
writer  and  speaker,  she  was  called 
upon  constantly  by  religious  and  civic 
groups  to  give  addresses  and  book  re- 
views, and  conduct  group  discussions. 
In  1935  she  wrote  for  the  "Salt  Lake 
Tribune"  under  the  name  of  Brenda 
Lee.  Her  untimely  death  was  a  shock 
which  everywhere  caused  people  to 
exclaim:  "She  was  so  alive,  so  vital, 
so  necessary."  Her  brilliance,  her  un- 
derstanding and  her  literary  gifts  will 
long  be  remembei'ed. 

BRIXEN,  Julia  M.,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  in  Sweden.  She  was  baptized 
at  the  age  of  13  (her  parents  having 
accepted  the  Gospel  in  Sweden),  and 
came  to  Utah  as  a  child  and  worked 
in  a  Salt  Lake  hotel  and  assisted  her 
family  to  emigrate.  She  was  married 
to  Andrew  Brixen,  Aug.  16,  1880,  and 
served  as  first  counselor  to  Agnes 
Campbell  in  the  20th  Ward  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  in  1898.  In  1901  she  became 
president,  and  was  called  to  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in 
May,  1898.  She  has  traveled  exten- 
sively in  the  United  States  and  Europe. 

BROCKBANK,      Hazel      Agnes,      a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Spanish 
Fork,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Joseph 
Brockbank  and  Emma  Jane  McKell. 
She  worked  in  the  auxiliary  organiza- 
tions in  the  Spanish  Fork  2nd  Ward 
previous  to  filling  a  mission  in  Cali- 
fornia in  1918-1920.  She  was  stake 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  Nebo 
Stake  from  1921  to  1923,  and  was  set 
apart  as  a  Y,  W.  M.  I.  A.  general 
board  member  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant 
in  1934.  She  received  a  B,  S  degree 
from  the  B.  Y.  University  in  1927,  and 
a  M.  A.  degree  from  Columbia  Univer- 
sity in  1930.  She  has  taught  in  the 
public  elementary  schools,  been  critic 
teacher  in  the  B.  Y.  U.  training  school, 
teacher  trainer  at  the  Branch  Agri- 
cultural   College,    supervisor    of    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


255 


elementary  schools  in  Provo  City,  and 
Utah  state  supei-visor  of  primary  edu- 
cation. Her  present  position  is  that 
of  supervisor  of  primary  education  at 
the  University  of  Utah. 

BUEHNER,  Lucile  Thurman,  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y. 
W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Samuel 
R.  Thurman  and  Victoria  Hodgert. 
She  was  educated  in  the  Salt  Lake 
City  schools  and  received  the  A.  B. 
degree  at  the  University  of  Utah,  was 
active  in  the  19th  Ward  M.  I.  A.  and 
activity  leader  on  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Board.  She  was  a  supervisor  of  phys- 
ical education  in  the  Ogden  City 
schools  and  taught  physical  education, 
speech  and  dramatics  in  the  Ogden 
High  School  over  a  period  of  several 
years,  taught  dancing  in  Salt  Lake 
City  for  three  years,  was  married  to 
Carl  W.  Buehner  in  1922,  and  became 
the  mother  of  four  children,  namely, 
Ruth,  June,  Marilyn,  and  Carl  F. 
Since  her  marriage  she  has  conducted 
activity  work  in  the  Wasatch  and  For- 
est Dale  Ward  M.  I.  A.  She  was  called 
to  the  General  Board  in  June,  1936. 


served  until  May  22,  1919.  She  was 
married  to  George  H.  Cain  in  1918, 
and  after  moving  to  California  has 
been  active  in  the  auxiliary  organiza- 
tion of  the  Los  Angeles  Branch  and 
Stake,  and  is  also  active  in  the  Par- 
ent-Teachers Organization  and  the 
Daughters  of  Utah  Pioneers. 

CALDWELL,  Lillian  Estelle  Neflf,  a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  August, 
1871,  in  Crescent,  Utah,  the  daughter 
of  Benjamin  Barr  Neff  and  Mary  Ellen 
Love.  She  graduated  from  the  Brig- 
ham  Young  University  in  1897,  was 
business  manager  and  assistant  editor 
of  the  "Young  Woman's  Journal"  for 
eight  years,  beginning  June,  1897.  She 
was  called  to  the  General  Board  in 
1902  and  released  in  1916.  While  act- 
ing as  president  of  the  Parent-Teach- 
ers' Association  of  the  Ensign  School 
in  1919  she  secured  the  Ensign  Play- 
ground. After  moving  to  Los  Angeles 
in  1924  she  has  been  active  in  gene- 
alogical work.  She  married  Richard 
Elmer  Caldwell  in  June,  1905,  and  is 
the  mother  of  one  son  and  two  daugh- 
ters. 


CAIN,   Mabel  May   Maslen  Cooper, 

a  member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  March  15, 
1875,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  William  Cooper  and  Eliza- 
beth Maslen.  She  was  educated  in  the 
public  schools,  the  L.  D.  S.  College  and 
Salt  Lake  Business  College,  studied 
music  under  Prof.  Evan  Stephens,  and 
later  in  New  York.  She  appeared  in 
leading  roles  with  the  Salt  Lake  Opera 
Company,  was  a  member  and  soloist 
of  the  Tabernacle  Choir  for  26  years, 
visited  in  Europe  on  two  occasions, 
and  served  in  various  capacities  in  the 
auxiliary  organizations  in  the  7th 
ward,  Salt  Lake  City;  was  chorister 
of  the  Pioneer  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
Board  for  seven  years,  called  to  su- 
pervise music  on  the  General  Board 
of   the   Y.   L.   M.   I.   A.  in   1914,  and 


CAMPBELL,  Agnes,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  daughter  of  Robert  L.  Campbell 
(a  pioneer  of  1847).  She  began  her 
public  work  very  early  in  life,  being 
first  called  to  the  presidency  of  the 
14th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  in  1888.  While  serving  in  that 
position  Sister  Elmina  Taylor  called 
her  to  act  as  an  aid  on  the  General 
Board.  In  1895  she  was  released  as 
the  family  moved  to  the  20th  Ward, 
and  three  years  later  she  was  made 
president  of  the  20th  Ward  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.,  which  position  she  held  until 
1901  when  she  moved  to  the  18th 
Ward.  In  1899  she  resigned  her  po- 
sition at  the  Z.  C.  M.  I.  to  become  as- 
sistant secretary  of  the  General  Board, 
and  later  assisted  with  the  "Journal." 


256 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


She  carried  her  ward  work  along  with 
her  General  Board  work,  which  was 
made  possible  by  her  excellent  busi- 
ness-like qualities. 

CAMPBELL,  Joan  M.,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  Robert  L. 
Campbell  (a  pioneer  of  1847).  Her 
father  died  when  she  was  16  years  of 
age,  leaving  sixteen  children.  Joan 
worked  in  the  Historian's  Office  for 
10  years,  and  then  as  cashier  at  the 
Z.  C.  M.  L  She  was  called  to  the  Gen- 
eral Board  in  1894,  and  served  as  an 
aid  and  as  general  secretary.  She  also 
served  in  the  14th  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  presidency  and  in  other  auxiliaries. 

CANNON,  Ann  Mousley,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  L  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  Angus  M.  Can- 
non and  Sarah  M.  Mousley.  She  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools  and 
was  graduated  from  the  University 
of  Utah.  She  became  assistant  sec- 
retary and  then  secretary  of  the  Gen- 
eral Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  at  an 
early  age,  which  latter  position  she 
held  about  nineteen  years,  ten  years 
of  which  she  was  also  treasurer,  and 
five  and  a  half  years  editor  of  the 
"Young  Woman's  Journal."  She  was 
chairman  of  the  committee  which 
formulated  the  plans  for  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Bee-Hive  Girls  organiza- 
tion, was  an  abstractor  in  the  county 
recorder's  office  of  Salt  Lake  County, 
and  served  as  a  deputy  for  seven 
years.  She  is  now  (1936)  cashier  of 
the  Prudential  Federal  Savings  & 
Loan  Association,  and  has  been  a 
member  of  the  board  of  control  of  the 
Deseret  Gymnasium  and  treasurer  of 
the  Art  Barn. 

CANNON,  Lucy  Grant,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
L  A.  and  the  second  daughter  of  Pres. 
Heber  J.  Grant  and  Lucy  Stringham, 


was  born  Oct.  22,  1880,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  She  was  educated  in  the 
public  schools,  attended  the  L.  D.  S. 
Seminary  in  the  18th  Ward,  the  L.  D. 
S.  High  School,  and  the  University  of 
Utah.    She  was  married  to  Geo.  Jen- 


kins Cannon  on  June  26,  1902,  and  they 
have  seven  children,  two  boys  and  five 
girls,  namely:  Rachel  C.  Heninger, 
Irene  C.  Lloyd,  Floi^ence  C.  Snow, 
Jean,  George  Ivins,  Lucy  Grant  and 
Heber  Stanley.  Sister  Cannon  acted 
as  a  teacher  in  the  Sunday  school  and 
as  organist,  secretary  and  counselor 
in  the  Primary  Association.  She  was 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  at  the 
age  of  18,  and  with  the  exception  of 
three  years  she  has  been  in  the  M. 
I.  A.  since  she  was  18  years  old.  She 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Western  States 
in  1901,  being  the  first  regular  lady 
missionary  to  go  with  her  companion. 
Some  women,  however,  had  previously 
accompanied  their  husbands  into  the 
mission  field.  She  was  called  to  the 
General  Board  in  1917,  and  acted  as 
a  counselor  to  Sister  Martha  H.  Tin- 
gey  and  to  Sister  Ruth  May  Fox. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


257 


CANNON,    Sarah    Ellen    Richards, 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  July  13,  1889, 
in  Tooele,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Geo. 
F.  Richards  and  Alice  Almira  Robin- 
son. She  was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1897, 
moved  to  Salt  Lake  City  in  June,  1906, 
was  educated  in  the  Tooele  district 
schools,  the  L.  D.  S.  University,  and 
the  University  of  Utah.  She  was 
married  to  Hugh  J.  Cannon,  July  26, 
1917,  and  became  the  mother  of  five 
children,  namely,  Geo.  Richards,  Alice 
Richards,  Donald  Hugo  (died  in  in- 
fancy). Maxwell  Richards,  and  Dean 
Richards.  She  served  as  Sunday 
School  teacher,  as  M.  I.  A.  counselor 
and  president  in  the  27th  Ward,  En- 
sign Stake,  and  became  a  member  of 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  General  Board  in 
the  spring  of  1912.  She  was  chair- 
man of  the  Bee-Hive  Committee  for 
five  years.  In  company  with  her  hus- 
band and  children  she  did  missionary 
work  in  the  Swiss-German  Mission 
from  1925  to  1928,  and  supervised  and 
helped  with  the  adaptation  and  trans- 
lation into  German  of  the  Bee-Hive 
Handbook. 

CARTER,  Lucy  Mack  Smith,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  April  14,  1890,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Alice  Kimball. 
She  was  educated  in  the  public  schools 
and  the  L.  D.  S.  University,  was  ac- 
tive all  her  life  in  Church  and  com- 
munity affairs,  and  is  the  mother  of 
seven  children.  After  her  release  from 
the  General  Board,  which  her  family 
duties  necessitated,  she  was  active  in 
the  Highland  Park  Ward  until  her 
death  which  occurred  Nov.  24,  1933. 

CLAWSON,  Vida  Fox,  was  made  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Young  Woman's  Mutual  Improvem.ent 
Association  in  April,  1927,  during  the 
time  when  Sister  Martha  H.  Tingey 
was  president  of  that  organization. 

She    was    born    in    Salt    Lake    City, 


Utah,  the  daughter  of  Ruth  May  and 
Jesse  W.  Fox,  jun.,  was  educated  in 
the  public  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City 
and  in  the  L.  D.  S.  University.  She 
was  married  to  Chester  Young  Claw- 
son,  June  10,  1910,  and  is  the  mother 
of  four  children,  viz:  Emily  Clawson 
Wright,  Ruth  Clawson  McGowen,  Vida 
Elizabeth,  and  Truman  Fox  Clawson. 

At  the  time  of  the  Church  Centen- 
nial she  began  organizing  social  study 
groups  for  the  study  of  Church 
History.  Each  of  these  twenty  odd 
groups  has  a  name,  and  the  aggregate 
is  called  The  Centennial  Society. 

In  1933  she  began  conducting  his- 
toric pilgrimages  to  Church  Shrines 
and  in  1934  arranged,  in  behalf  of  one 
of  these  pilgrimages,  for  a  meeting  to 
be  held  in  the  Kirtland  Temple.  This 
was  the  first  meeting  held  in  that  Tem- 
ple by  members  of  our  Church  for 
nearly  one  hundred  years.  Elder  Mel- 
vin  J.  Ballard  was  the  speaker  and 
gave  a  stirring  review  of  the  restora- 
tion of  the  Gospel,  and  especially  the 
events  which  took  place  in  the  Temple 
at  Kirtland,  Ohio.  It  was  a  glorious 
event  and  almost  a  hundred  Latter- 
day  Saints  were  present  to  participate 
in  the  exercises. 

DIMOND.  Laura  B.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  born  Dec.  1,  1872,  in  Taylors- 
ville,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Samuel 
Roberts  Bennion  (pioneer  of  1847)  and 
Mary  Panter  (pioneer  of  1860).  Her 
education  was  obtained  at  the  L.  D.  S. 
College  and  the  B.  Y.  Academy.  She 
served  as  secretary  of  the  Primary 
Association  in  the  Taylorsville  Ward, 
and  leader  in  the  Granite  Stake  M.  I. 
A.  She  spent  23  months  in  the  North- 
ern States  Mission  in  1907-1908,  and 
was  called  to  the  General  Board  in 
October,  1908,  and  released  in  August, 
1929. 

DORIUS,  Claire  Parrish,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was    born    in    Centerville,    Utah,    the 


Vol.   IV.   No.   17 


April  25.  193G 


258 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


daughter  of  Joel  Parrish  and  Emma 
Ford.  She  was  educated  in  the  public 
schools,  the  L.  D.  S.  University  and 
the  B.  Y.  University  and  the  U.  A.  C. 
She  became  active  in  Church  work  at 
an  early  date,  acting  as  secretary  to 
Dr.  John  A.  Widtsoe  in  a  large  Sunday 
school  class  of  college  students  and 
was  also  his  secretary  and  stenog- 
rapher in  the  preparation  of  lesson 
material  for  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  She 
graduated  fi'om  the  U.  A.  C.  and  was 
employed  to  take  charge  of  the  Home 
Economics  Department  of  the  L.  D.  S. 
High  School.  She  was  married  to  Ray 
E.  Dorius  in  1016  and  had  three  chil- 
dren, viz.,  Joel,  Julia  and  Kermit.  She 
was  a  member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
M.  L  A.  Board  for  eight  years  and  was 
called  to  the  General  Board  in  1932. 
Owing  to  other  duties  she  was  released 
in  1936. 

DOUGALL,  Maria  Young,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
1.  A.,  was  born  Dec.  10,  1849,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Brig- 
ham  Young  and  Clarissa  Ross.  She 
received  her  education  from  private 
tutors  in  her  father's  house.  Her 
mother  died  when  she  was  8  and  she 
was  mothered  by  Zina  D.  H.  Young. 
On  June  1,  1868,  she  was  married  to 
Wm.  B.  Dougall  and  was  the  mother 
of  five  children.  She  served  as  a 
counseolr  to  Sister  Ella  Y.  Empey  in 
the  first  Retrenchment  Association,  or- 
ganized on  Nov.  28,  1869,  served  as 
counselor  in  the  17th  Ward  Association 
and  then  as  counselor  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  In  1887  she  was 
called  as  first  counselor  to  Pres.  El- 
mina  S.  Taylor  in  the  general  pi*esi- 
dency  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  In  1893 
she  was  called  as  a  worker  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  She  attended  three 
national  conventions  of  the  National 
Council  of  Women  and  the  SufTi'age 
Convention  in  1887  in  Washington, 
D.  C.     She  died  April  30,  1935. 

EARDLEY,  Catherine  Adella  Wool- 
ley,  a  member  of  the  General  Board  of 


the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  July  31, 
1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  Samuel  A.  Woolley  and 
Catherine  E.  Mehring.  She  was  edu- 
cated in  the  public  schools.  Dr.  Elvira 
Barney's  private  school  and  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah.  She  served  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Primary  in  the  Salt  Lake 
City  3rd  Ward  for  twelve  years,  as 
secretary  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  for 
twelve  years,  became  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
June  29,  1889,  and  served  in  that  capa- 
city for  36  years.  She  was  an  active 
missionary  on  Temple  Square  for  nine 
years,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Na- 
tional Council  of  Women  in  Chicago  in 
1911,  at  which  she  gave  a  detailed  re- 
port on  Mutual  work;  she  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Civic  Club, 
the  Reapers  Club,  the  Authors  Club 
and  the  Friendship  Circle,  was  active 
as  a  political  worker  for  28  years  and 
was  a  delegate  to  the  World's  Congress 
of  Religions  in  1893.  She  was  mar- 
ried in  1878. 

EDDINGTON,  Sarah,  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  June  13,  1861,  in  the  14th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Her 
father  came  to  Utah  in  1853,  and  was 
one  of  the  historical  figures  of  the 
general  tithing  office  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  Sarah  was  an  excellent  student; 
she  attended  the  public  schools  and 
graduated  into  the  State  University. 
Owing  to  a  severe  accident,  her  Uni- 
versity work  ended  in  the  second  year. 
She  was  a  teacher  in  the  7th  Ward 
Sunday  School  for  years  and  president 
of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  for  eight  years 
in  the  same  ward.  She  was  a  valuable 
member  of  the  General  Board,  and  did 
much  toward  the  promotion  of  the 
traveling  library.  She  worked  as  chief 
clerk  in  the  auditor's  office  at  Salt 
Lake  City  and  was  deputy  in  the  same 
office  for  six  years.  Later  she  was 
employed  in  the  county  recorder's 
office. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENYLOPEDIA 


259 


EVANS,  Martha  J.,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  in  Nephi,  Utah,  the  daughter 
of  Walter  P.  Read  and  Martha  Ann 
Pond.  She  was  educated  in  the  public 
schools  and  the  University  of  Utah, 
and  studied  music  under  local  teachers. 
In  1902  she  went  to  Germany  and 
studied  at  the  Sterns  Conservatory  of 
Music  and  under  Leopold  Godowsky  in 
Berlin.  She  served  as  choir  leader  and 
organist  in  the  21st  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  in  1897  was  called  to  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  General  Board  as  organ- 
ist and  served  until  about  1910.  She 
was  married  in  1907  to  P.  Carl  Evans. 

FOLSOM,  Catherine,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  born  in  the  14th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
William  Burdette  Folsom  and  Sarah 
Catherine  Eakle.  She  received  her 
education  in  the  public  schools  and  the 
Salt  Lake  High  School,  was  a  teacher 
in  Sunday  School  in  the  14th  and 
Richards  wards,  treasurer  in  the  Relief 
Society  of  the  14th  Ward,  choir  treas- 
urer in  the  14th  Ward,  also  secretary, 
class  leader  and  1st  counselor  in  the 
14th  Ward  M.  I.  A.,  acted  as  secretary 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  M.  I.  A.,  and 
served  as  secretary  to  the  City  Engi- 
neer, secretary-treasurer  of  the  Board 
of  Canal  presidents  and  assistant  in- 
structor on  the  Red  Cross  Board.  She 
was  called  to  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  1920. 

FOX,  Ruth  May,  general  president 
of  the  Young  Women's  Mutual  Im- 
provement Association,  was  born  Nov. 
16,  1853,  in  Westbury,  Wilshire,  Eng- 
land, the  daughter  of  James  May  and 
Mary  Ann  Harding.  She  emigrated 
to  America  in  1865  and  crossed  the 
plains  in  1867  by  ox-team  in  Capt. 
Leonard  Rice's  Company,  which  was 
outfitted  at  North  Platte.  Her  first 
position  in  the  Church  was  Sunday 
School  teacher  in  the  14th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  at  the  age  of  17.  Since 
then   she   has   worked   in  the   Church 


almost  continuously.  When  the  Pri- 
mary Association  was  first  organized 
in  the  14th  Ward  she  served  as  coun- 
selor to  Clara  C.  Cannon.  Later,  she 
became  president,  serving  for  19  years. 


From  1895  to  1904  she  was  president 
of  the  14th  Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  In 
1898  she  was  called  as  an  aid  to  the 
General  Board,  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Pres.  Martha  H.  Tingey 
and  in  March,  1929,  became  general 
president,  succeeding  Sister  Tingey. 
She  served  as  a  missionary  on  Temple 
Square  for  25  years.  Sister  Fox  is  the 
mother  of  twelve  children,  viz.,  Jesse 
May,  Eliza  May  (deceased),  George 
James,  Ruth  Clare  (Taylor),  Feramorz 
Young,  Hyrum  Lester,  Esther  Vida 
(Clawson),  Frank  Harding,  Lucy 
Beryl  (Evenson),  Leonard  Grant,  Flor- 
ence (Mackay),  and  Emeline  Blanche 
(deceased). 

FREEZE,  Lillie  (Lelia)   Tuckett,  a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 


260 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Henry 
Tuckett  and  Mercel  E.  Westwood.  She 
went  to  St.  George  in  1861,  but  later 
returned  to  Salt  Lake  City,  was  active 
in  the  various  auxiliary  organizations 
of  the  nth  Ward,  especially  in  the 
Retrenchment  Association,  and  edited 
the  nth  Ward  "Star".  She  married 
James  P.  Freeze  and  bore  four  chil- 
dren. In  October,  1889,  she  was  called 
to  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.,  and  wrote  for  the  "Young 
Ladies  Journal"  and  the  "Woman's  Ex- 
ponent". She  spoke  in  the  Tabernacle 
on  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  Church 
and  prepared  an  article  on  M.  I.  A. 
work,  used  at  the  World's  Fair  in 
1893. 

FREEZE,  Mary  Ann  Burnham,  a 
member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Oct.  12, 
1845,  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  the  daughter 
of  James  Lewis  Burnham  and  Mary 
Ann  Huntley.  She  was  born  two  days 
after  the  death  of  her  father  in  Nau- 
voo; her  mother  then  married  Joseph 
Young  and  they  were  driven  with  the 
Saints  from  Nauvoo.  Crossing  the 
plains  she  reached  Salt  Lake  in  1852. 
She  attended  schools  at  Bountiful  and 
Richmond,  Utah,  married  James  Perry 
Freeze  in  March,  1863,  at  the  age  of 
16,  moved  to  the  11th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  in  1863,  was  the  mother  of  nine 
children  and  was  one  of  four  wives. 
In  October,  1871,  she  was  called  to 
preside  over  the  11th  Ward  Retrench- 
ment Society  and  later  presided  over 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  for  many  years.  In  1889  she 
became  a  member  of  the  Genez'al  Board 
and  served  until  her  death  in  1912. 
She  was  one  of  the  first  missionaries 
to  serve  on  Temple  Square  in  Salt  Lake 
City. 

GATES,  Susa  Young,  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  March  18,  1856,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Brigham 
Young  and  Lucy  Bigelow.  She  was 
the  first  editor  of  the  "Young  Woman's 


Journal"  in  1889  and  was  made  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  the  same  year.  (See  L.  D.  S. 
Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol.  2,  p. 
626.)  She  died  May  27,  1933,  at  Salt 
Lake  City. 

GODDARD,  Emma  J.  Nield,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  from  1897  to  1935,  was  born 
April  19,  1861,  in  Oldham,  Lancashire, 
England,  the  daughter  of  Joseph  M. 
Nield  and  Jane  Standing.  Her  parents 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1875,  and  Sister 
Goddard  followed  four  years  later, 
joining  her  parents  in  Meadow,  Mil- 
lard Co.,  Utah.  In  the  fall  of  1883, 
she  married  Benjamin  Goddard  in  the 
St.  George  Temple.  She  attended  the 
B.  Y.  Academy  and  taught  school  for 
several  years;  was  Sunday  School 
teacher  and  president  of  the  Y,  L.  M. 
I.  A.  in  the  21st  Ward,  and  was  called 
to  the  General  Board  in  1897,  serving 
in  that  capacity  for  37  years.  She  was 
released  in  the  summer  of  1935. 

GRANT,  Augusta  Winters,  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.  since  1899,  was  born  July 
7,  1856,  in  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah. 
She  attended  the  Timpanogos  School 
in  Provo  and  later  entered  the 
Brigham  Young  Academy.  She  also 
attended  the  State  University,  gradu- 
ating from  the  second  normal  class  in 
1877.  Mrs.  Grant  possesses  the  gift  of 
pedagogy  to  a  marked  degree.  When 
only  twelve  years  of  age  she  acted  as 
an  assistant  teacher  to  an  old  lady. 
She  followed  this  pi-ofession  for  ten 
years,  or  up  to  the  time  of  her  marriage 
to  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant,  who  was  then 
an  Apostle.  She  was  also  a  telegraph 
operator,  but  only  used  this  skill  for 
a  brief  period.  She  accompanied  her 
husband  to  open  the  Japanese  mission 
and  remained  there  fifteen  months.  To 
her  only  one  child  was  born,  but  she 
has  been  a  mother  to  a  large  family 
of  her  husband's  motherless  children. 
She    has    always    been    active   in    the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


261 


Church.  At  the  age  of  14  she  was 
made  secretary  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A., 
and  has  served  in  that  same  capacity 
in  ward  and  stake  Relief  societies.  In 
1899  she  was  chosen  as  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
and  is  still  an  honorary  member  of 
that  organization. 

HARDY,  Polly  A.  Reynolds,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  May  11,  1888,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
Geo.  Reynolds  and  Mary  Goold.  She 
was  baptized  about  June,  1896,  married 
Thomas  Fredrick  Hardy,  Sept.  25, 1914, 
and  has  four  children,  viz.,  Ruth,  Fred- 
rick Reynolds,  Howard  Reynolds,  and 
Grant  Reynolds.  She  served  in  the 
ward  Primary  in  1902-1906,  and  other 
ward  auxiliaries  in  1908-1914,  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Sunday  School  Board 
in  1910-1914  and  in  the  Ensign  Stake 
Board  of  the  Sunday  school  in  1920- 
1927.  She  also  acted  as  president  and 
counselor  in  the  Ensign  Stake  M.  I.  A. 
in  1922-1927,  and  was  a  member  of  the 
Liberty  Stake  M.  I.  A.  Board  in  1931- 
1936.  In  June  1936  she  was  called  to 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A. 

HIGGS,  Emily  Hillam,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  the  daughter  of  Rodney  Hillam 
and  Ann  Grimsdell.  She  attended  the 
Salt  Lake  public  schools,  and  the  L.  D. 
S.  College  in  the  Social  Hall  under 
Prof.  James  E.  Talmage;  attended 
singing  school  in  the  old  Council 
House  under  Prof.  Evan  Stephens; 
spent  one  summer  in  England  and 
France,  married  Jesse  Brentnall  Higgs 
and  is  the  mother  of  five  children. 
After  her  husband's  death  in  1905,  she 
worked  in  the  office  of  Heber  J.  Grant 
&  Company  until  1929,  taught  classes 
in  the  Ward  Sunday  School,  Primary 
and  Relief  Society  at  various  times, 
served  as  second  counselor  in  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  from  the  organization  of 
Liberty  Stake  in  1904  until  she  was 
made  president  in  1912.  The  first 
M.  I.  A.  summer  camp  for  girls  was 


established  by  the  Liberty  Stake  in 
1912-1913,  while  she  was  president. 
She  was  called  from  the  stake  to  the 
General  Board  of  the  M.  I.  A.  in  1916. 
Sister  Higgs  is  highly  interested  in 
genealogical  research  work. 

HODGSON,    Vernetta     Lindsay,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Taylors- 
ville,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Joseph 
Lindsay  and  Ethely^  Towler.  She 
was  educated  in  the  public  schools, 
the  Granite  High  School  and  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah.  She  studied  music 
at  the  McCune  School  of  Music  and 
the  Kansas  City  Conservatory  of  Mu- 
sic, and  taught  for  three  years  in  the 
Granite  School  District.  She  served  as 
organist  in  the  Taylorsville  Ward  and 
the  Cottonwood  Stake;  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  Stake 
Boai'd  of  Cottonwood  Stake,  and  as  a 
member  of  the  Relief  Society  Board. 
In  1922  she  was  called  to  the  General 
Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  After  her 
marriage  to  Russell  B.  Hodgson  the 
family  moved  to  California  where  she 
served  as  music  director  of  the  Long 
Beach  Ward  M.  I.  A.  Her  two  sons 
are  Russell,  jun.,  and  Joseph.  She 
died  in  1936. 

JENSEN,  Freda,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  at  Provo,  Utah,  July  2,  1897, 
a  daughter  of  Julius  Jensen  and  Chris- 
tine Thuesen.  She  was  baptized  July 
30,  1905,  by  Abraham  O.  Smoot,  jun., 
and  from  the  age  of  14  years  served  as 
organist  in  the  Sunday  School  and  later 
was  organist  in  the  Religion  Class,  in 
the  M.  I.  A.,  and  for  the  ward.  Sister 
Jensen  was  called  to  become  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Jordan  Stake  Sunday  School 
Board  and  later  served  on  the  East 
Jordan  Stake  S.  S.  Board  as  music 
director  and  community  activity  super- 
visor. She  was  acting  as  president  of 
the  East  Jordan  Stake  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A. 
when  in  1936  she  was  called  to  serve  on 
the  Music  Committee  of  the  general 
board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.     She  is  a 


262 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


graduate  of  the  music  and  educational 
departments  of  the  Brigham  Young 
University  and  has  attended  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  and  the  University  of 
California. 

JENSEN,      Kate     Cunningham,      a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Charles 
Cunningham  and  Alice  Luella  Decker. 
She  is  a  great  granddaughter  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  and  Miriam  Works. 
She  was  married  to  William  H.  Jen- 
sen, and  at  the  age  of  36  she  was  the 
mother  of  nine  children,  her  tenth  child 
being  born  in  her  40th  year.  Her 
children  are  James  Vivian  (deceased), 
Lueen  Young,  Alibo  Patrina,  Joseph 
William,  Genevieve  Cunningham, 
Dwight  Cunningham,  Carol  Cunning- 
ham, Bette  and  Keith.  Sister  Jensen 
has  worked  in  all  the  organizations 
open  to  women  in  the  Church,  with  the 
exception  of  the  Relief  Society.  She 
was  a  teacher  of  personality  and  charm 
in  school  and  social  center;  her  hobby 
was  people,  her  big  interest,  youth, 
and  her  philosophy,  happiness.  Her 
greatest  aspiration  is  to  be  a  consis- 
tent Latter-day  Saint. 

JOSEPHSON,  Marba  Cannon,  asso- 
ciate editor  of  the  "Improvement  Era" 
and  member  of  the  General  Boaid  of 
the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Phila- 
delphia, Pa.,  the  daughter  of  Abram 
H.  Cannon  and  Lilian  Hamlin.  She 
was  baptized  by  Lewis  M.  Cannon, 
taught  school  after  having  graduated 
from  the  University  of  Utah,  with  a 
B.  A.  degree  and  a  certificate  in  edu- 
cation. Taught  in  the  Nephi  High 
School  for  two  years,  in  the  Box  Elder 
High  School  for  two  years,  in  the  Gila 
College,  Thatcher,  Arizona,  one  year 
in  the  University  of  Utah,  and  six  in 
the  L.  D.  S.  College,  from  which  she 
graduated  before  attending  the  Uni- 
versity. She  took  graduate  work  at 
the  U.  of  U.  and  the  University  of 
California.     She  was  married  April  2, 


1924,  to  Newel  Forstner  Josephson  and 
is  the  mother  of  five  children,  viz. 
Newel  F.,  jun..  Dale  Cannon,  Janet, 
John  and  Blaine.  At  the  present  time 
she  is  associate  editor  of  the  "Impi-ove- 
ment  Era"  and  is  a  teacher  at  the  Lion 
House  Social  Center. 

KIMBALL,  Mary  Connelly,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Feb.  19,  1876,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  LUah,  the  daughter  of 
John  Connelly  and  Elizabeth  Jessop. 
She  received  her  A.  B.  degree  from 
the  University  of  Utah  in  1898,  taught 
school  for  nine  years  in  the  elementary 
and  high  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
served  as  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  in  the  21st  and  27th  wards,  was  a 
member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Board, 
and  was  called  in  1904  to  the  General 
Board  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  In  1907  she 
became  editor  of  the  "Young  Woman's 
Journal"  and  served  for  16  years.  She 
was  married  to  Andrew  Kimball  June 
5,  1923,  released  from  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  Board  in  1930  and  called  to  the 
General  Board  of  Relief  Society  in 
1930,  and  became  editor  of  the  "Relief 
Society  Magazine." 

KNOWLTON,  Agnes  Smith,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Nov.  3,  1897,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter 
of  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Mary  Taylor 
Schwartz.  She  was  baptized  Nov.  3, 
1905,  by  her  father,  attended  the  pub- 
lic schools  and  University  of  Utah, 
graduating  in  191S  with  a  teacher's 
life  diploma.  The  next  winter  was 
spent  at  home,  Calvin  was  in  France, 
Samuel  in  Califoi-nia  studying  avia- 
tion, James  watching  the  farm,  Silas 
at  Fort  Douglas  and  Royal  with  her 
and  mother.  Her  father  died  in  No- 
vember, and  the  flu  was  very  bad,  so 
she  studied  nursing-  under  Dr.  Maggie 
Roberts.  It  was  the  last  class  that 
Dr.  Roberts  taught,  and  Sister  Knowl- 
ton's  mother  had  been  a  member  of 
her    first    class.      In    1919    and    1920 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


263 


Agnes  Smith  went  to  the  University 
and  received  her  M.  A.  degree,  after 
which  she  taught  in  the  social  science 
department     of     the     Gi-anite     High 
School  for  three  years.     She  attended 
the    University    of    Chicago    in    1923, 
being   acquainted   with    Dr.    Brecken- 
ridge,  Dr.  Merriam,  Dr.  Freud  and  Dr. 
Dodd.     She    was   married    to    Horace 
S.  Knowlton  Jan.  1,  1926,  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple  and  this  union  has  been 
blessed   with   the  following   children: 
John  S.,  Ruth  S.,  Horace  S.,  Joseph  S., 
Mary  S.,  and  Sarah  S.    Sister  Knowl- 
ton has  had  the  good  fortune  to  travel 
extensively,  visiting  California,  Wash- 
ington, D.  C,  Philadelphia,  New  York, 
Alberta,  Canada,  and  Montreal,  Can- 
ada, and  the   Hawaiian  Islands.    She 
was  made  a  member  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  Board  in  1921,  has  been  a  member 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Oratorio  Society  for 
15  years,  has   been   a   Sunday  School 
teacher  for  10  years,  has  taught  in  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  and  belongs  to  the  En- 
sign Camp  of  Daughters  of  Utah  Pio- 
neers. 

LOVESY,  Edith  Rossiter,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  born  Jan.  29,  1876,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
William  A.  Rossiter  and  Eliza  Crab- 
tree.  At  the  age  of  21  she  was  mar- 
ried to  W.  H.  Lovesy,  labored  in  the 
various  auxiliaries  of  the  Church,  serv- 
ing in  the  presidency  of  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I,  A.  of  the  2nd  Ward  until  1901. 
She  then  made  her  home  in  Pocatello 
and  was  president  of  the  Pocatello 
Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  and  later  stake 
president.  She  was  called  to  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
in  1908. 

McCUNE,  Elizabeth   Ann   Claridge, 

a  member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  England, 
and  brought  as  a  baby  of  nine  months 
to  America  in  1852.  The  family  settled 
in  Nephi,  Utah,  went  to  Nevada  in 
1867,  thence  to  Ordevville  and  back  to 
Nephi.     In    1872  she   was   married  to 


Alfred  W.  McCune  and  in  1896  she 
spent  several  months  in  England,  as- 
sisting the  missionaries  there.  She 
was   called   to  the   General   Board  in 

1898,  was  associated  with  the  National 
Council  of  Women  and  attended  the 
International    Council    in    London    in 

1899.  She  was  a  Temple  worker  and 
also  a  missionary  on  Temple  Square. 
(See  Biographical  Encyclopedia,  Vol. 
2,  p.  667,  and  Young  Woman's  Journal, 
Vol.  9,  pp.  291,  339  and  385.)  She  died 
August  1,  1924. 

MANGUM,  Jennie  I^night,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Nov.  7,  1885,  the 
daughter  of  Jesse  and  Amanda  Knight. 
She  was  educated  in  the  public  schools 
of  Provo  and  the  B.  Y.  University, 
was  married  in  1905  to  W.  Lester 
Mangum,  is  the  mother  of  three  sons 
and  four  daughters,  has  served  in 
various  capacities  in  ward  and  stake 
in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  and  Relief  So- 
ciety, and  was  called  to  the  General 
Board  in  March,  1924,  being  set  apart 
by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant.  She  was  re- 
leased in   1929. 

NESLEN,  Grace  Cannon,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
I.  A.,  was  born  Jan.  1,  1880,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
George  Q.  Cannon  and  Martha  Telle. 
She  was  baptized  Jan.  1,  1888,  by  her 
father,  attended  the  private  school  of 
Camilla  Cobb,  the  L.  D.  S.  College  and 
the  University  of  Utah.  She  spent  one 
year  at  a  Boston  Cooking  School  and 
then  conducted  Miss  Cannon's  School 
of  Cookery  in  Salt  Lake  City;  served 
as  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  president  in  the 
Cannon  Ward,  and  as  a  member  of  the 
Pioneer  Stake  Sunday  School  Board. 
She  also  acted  as  president  of  the 
20th  Ward  Primary  Association  and 
was  a  member  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
Board  of  Ensign  Stake.  In  1905  (Oct. 
26)  she  was  married  to  C.  Clai-ence 
Neslen,  who  has  been  Bishop  of  the 
20th  Ward  for  23  years  and  mayor  of 
Salt  Lake  City  for  eight  years.     She 


264 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


was  called  to  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  General 
Board  in  February,  1924,  and  is  a 
member  of  the  board  of  directors  of 
Memory  Park.  She  is  the  mother  of 
five  children,  viz.,  Clarence  Cannon, 
Robert  Cannon,  Gertrude  N.  (Thody), 
George  Quayle  and  Charles  Richard. 

NICHOLSON,     Laura     Patrick,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Robert 
Patrick  and  Rachel  Baird.  She  has 
been  active  in  Church  activities  all  her 
life,  having  Served  as  a  Sunday 
School  teacher,  president  of  the  Y. 
L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  18th  Ward  for  four 
yeai's,  and  on  the  Ensign  Stake  Board 
of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  After  serving 
as  president  of  the  Ensign  Stake  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  for  two  years,  she  was  called 
to  the  General  Board  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
in  March,  1921.  She  has  worked  on 
many  of  the  General  Board  commit- 
tees, both  joint  and  separate,  has 
done  her  full  share  in  visiting  the 
stakes  of  Zion,  in  the  interest  of  the 
M.  I.  A.,  and  is  still  active  in  the  work. 
She  has  traveled  extensively  through- 
out the  United  States.  She  was  mar- 
ried in  June,  1905,  to  Silas  E.  Corey, 
who  died  eight  months  later.  In  Oc- 
tober, 1915,  she  was  married  to  John 
K.  Nicholson,  a  widower  with  two 
sons,  whom  she  cared  for  until  they 
were  married.  At  the  death  of  her 
sister,  Mrs.  Fred  H.  Barnes,  she  took 
her  sister's  children  (Robert  H.  and 
Fred  Patrick  Barnes)  into  her  home 
and  leared  them  as  her  own. 

NYSTROM,  Mae  Taylor,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  George  Ham- 
ilton Taylor  and  Elmina  Shepherd. 
She  was  educated  in  the  public  schools, 
the  L.  D.  S.  College  and  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah;  was  married  to  Theo- 
dore Nystrom  in  1900,  served  as  sec- 
retary and  treasurer  and  second  covm- 
selor  in  the  14th  Ward  M.  I.  A.,  and 


was  called  to  the  General  Board  of 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  Oct.  9,  1892.  In 
April,  1905,  she  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Martha  H.  Tingey 
and  served  in  this  position  for  18 
years.  After  being  released  in  1923, 
she  moved  to  Green  River,  Wyoming, 
and  served  as  stake  president  of  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  Lyman  Stake  in 
1926-1929;  she  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City  in  1929.  Sister  Nystrom  was  a 
delegate  to  the  National  Council  of 
Women  in  1908  and  to  the  triennial 
session  held   in   Seattle  in  1909. 

ROLAND,  Erma,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  Jan.  28,  1902,  in  Murray, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  August  Roland 
and  Delia  Johnson.  She  was  called  to 
the  General  Board  in  the  fall  of  1932, 
being  set  apart  by  Pres.  Heber  J. 
Gi'ant.  At  the  time  of  her  appoint- 
ment she  was  a  counselor  in  the  M. 
I.  A.  presidency  of  the  Grant  Stake. 
In  1921,  when  the  Gleaner  organiza- 
tion first  came  into  being  as  a  part 
of  the  senior  girl  program  of  the 
Granite  Stake,  she  was  made  a  mem- 
ber of  the  executive  committee.  Pre- 
vious to  serving  in  stake  work  she 
was  a  Sunday  School  teacher  and  a 
ward  M.  I.  A.  worker.  She  was  edu- 
cated in  the  schools  of  the  Granite 
District  in  Salt  Lake  County  and  in 
the  University  of  Utah,  and  has  also 
taken  some  special  work  in  eastei-n 
.schools. 

SARDONI,     Elizabeth    Thomas,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  May  6,  1881, 
in  the  13th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  Charles  J. 
Thomas,  prominent  pioneer  musician, 
and  Amy  Adams.  She  was  educated 
in  the  public  schools  and  the  L.  D.  S. 
College;  began  her  musical  education 
when  a  small  child,  studied  piano  in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  Boston,  and  was 
Sunday  School  organist  in  the  13th 
Ward  when  very  young.    At   16,  she 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYLOPEDIA 


265 


was  made  organist  for  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  choir  and  filled  that  position 
for  eight  years.  In  1906  (March  22) 
she  was  married  to  Lawrence  Sar- 
doni,  a  young  violinist,  and  they  have 
two  children,  Lawrence,  junior,  and 
Dearwyn.  Sister  Sardoni  has  served 
in  the  following  positions  in  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.:  president  of  the  13th  ward, 
assistant  organist  of  the  General 
Board  from  1902  to  1914,  member  and 
later  president  of  the  Cache  Stake 
Board,  counselor  in  the  South  Davis 
Stake  (1921),  counselor  in  North  San- 
pete Stake  (1929),  and  president  of 
the  Grand  Junction  (Colo.)  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A. 

SMITH,  Alice  Kimball,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
I.  A.,  was  born  Sept.  6,  1858,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  He- 
ber  C.  Kimball  and  Ann  Alice  Gheen, 
and  twin  sister  of  Andrew  Kimball. 
She  received  her  education  in  the  public 
schools  and  the  Deseret  University  of 
Utah,  served  as  a  teacher  in  Sunday 
Schools,  was  counselor  in  the  19th 
Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  president  of  the 
Primary  in  that  ward,  and  was  called 
to  the  General  Board  in  1896.  In  April, 
1905,  she  was  appointed  to  act  as  gen- 
eral treasurer,  served  in  a  General 
Board  capacity  for  30  years,  and  was 
released  because  of  poor  health.  In 
1914  she  attended  the  International 
Council   of   Women   at   Rome,   Italy. 

SMITH,  Lucy  Woodruflf,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
I.  A.,  was  born  Jan.  10,  1869,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff  and  Emily  J.  Smith. 
In  1887  she  was  chosen  to  act  as  ward 
president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 
17th  Ward,  and  in  1894  she  was  elect- 
ed treasurer  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  When  the  stake  was 
divided  in  1902,  she  was  chosen  to  act 
as  second  counselor  to  Nellie  C.  Tay- 
lor in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  presidency  and  was  called  to  the 


General  Board  in  1908.  She  was  mar- 
ried May  25,  1892,  to  George  Albert 
Smith  and  is  the  mother  of  three 
children,  viz.,  Emily  S.  Stewart,  Edith 
S.  Elliott  and  George  Albert,  jun. 

SMITH,  Martha  Gee,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  born  in  Provo,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  George  W.  Gee  and  So- 
phina  A.  Fuller.  She  was  educated  in 
the  public  schools  and  the  Brigham 
Young  University,  was  married  to 
Hyrum  Gibbs  Smith  (who  became  the 
Patriarch  of  the  Church)  May  5,  1912, 
and  bore  eight  children,  namely  Cle- 
one  (now  the  wife  of  Alma  Isom),  El- 
dred  Gee  (who  married  Jean  Ness), 
Helen  (now  the  wife  of  John  Huef- 
ner),  Miriam  (now  the  wife  of  John 
C.  Dalton),  Barden  Gee,  Hyrum  Gee, 
Verona  and  Donna.  Before  her  mar- 
riage Sister  Smith  worked  as  secre- 
tary in  the  Primary  Association  and 
teacher  in  the  Sunday  School.  After 
the  first  two  children  were  born  the 
family  moved  from  Lehi,  Utah,  where 
Brother  Smith  had  been  employed  as 
a  school  teacher.  Then  they  moved  to 
Los  Angeles,  where  he  entered  the 
University  of  Southei-n  California 
Dental  College.  While  in  Los  Angeles 
Sister  Smith  was  a  teacher  in  the 
Sunday  School  and  the  Relief  Society, 
and  served  in  the  presidency  of  the  Y. 
L.  M.  I.  A.  After  their  return  to  Salt 
Lake  City,  she  worked  as  a  teacher 
in  the  M.  I,  A.,  also  as  a  leader  in  a 
genealogical  class  and  in  the  Relief 
Society.  She  was  called  to  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  En- 
sign Stake,  and  in  August,  1918,  be- 
came a  member  of  the  General  Board, 
which  position  she  still  holds  (1936). 
When  the  Lion  House  Social  Center 
was  taken  over  by  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
in  1932,  she  was  made  hostess.  Since 
that  time  she  has  been  a  gracious 
hostess  to  hundreds  of  girls  and  wom- 
en, who  have  come  to  enjoy  the 
"homey"  atmosphere  and  participate 
in   the   many  activities   of  the   Social 


266 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Center,  conducted  in  the  historic  Lion      lowing  childx-en:  Devirl  Nixon,  James 
House.  Wm.,  and  Marilyn. 


SNOW,  Minnie  Jensen,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Oct.  10,  1854,  in 
Brigham  City,  Utah,  five  days  after 
the  arrival  of  her  parents  from  Den- 
mark. She  came  to  Salt  Lake  City 
at  the  age  of  14  to  study  music  and 
other  subjects.  In  1875  she  was 
chosen  to  act  as  president  of  the  Re- 
trenchment Society  in  Brigham  City, 
and  in  1879  she  was  made  stake  pres- 
ident of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  Box  Elder 
Stake.  At  the  age  of  17  she  was 
married  to  Lorenzo  Snow  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  five  children. 
She  was  called  to  the  General  Board 
in  1892,  and  thrice  was  sent  as  a  dele- 
gate to  the  National  Council  of  Wom- 
en. Pres.  Snow  died  in  1901  and  Sis- 
ter Snow  in  January,  1908. 

STEWART,  Grace  Nixon,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  is  the  daughter  of  J.  W.  Nix- 
on and  Effie  Dean  Woolley.  She  was 
a  graduate  of  the  B.  Y.  University  in 
1921  with  a  B.  A.  degree,  graduate  of 
the  "Leland  Powers  School  of  the 
Spoken  Word"  in  1923,  received  the 
A.  M.  from  the  London  Royal  Acad- 
emy in  1926,  and  the  degree  of 
Master  of  Arts  from  the  Columbia 
University  in  May,  1936.  She  gradu- 
ated from  the  Rice  School  of  Speech 
and  Dramatic  Art  in  1935,  taught  in 
the  speech  department  of  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah  four  years,  and  was  a 
member  of  the  B.  Y.  University  for 
seven  years.  She  recently  (1936) 
studied  at  the  Northwestern  Univer- 
sity towai'ds  a  doctor's  degree.  Sister 
Stewart  has  been  active  in  the  auxil- 
iary organizations  of  the  Church, 
filled  a  mission  with  her  husband  to 
Great  Britain  in  1926,  and  was  called 
to  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
L  A.  in  August,  1936.  On  May  28, 
1924,  she  was  married  to  Devirl  B. 
Stewart  and  is  the  mother  of  the  fol- 


STEWART,  S.  Charlotte,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  is  the  daughter  of 
William  M.  Stewart  and  Sarah  E.  Tay- 
lor. She  was  educated  in  the  public 
schools,  received  an  A.  B.  degree  from 
the  Univei'sity  of  Utah,  an  M.  A.  de- 
gree from  the  University  of  New  York 
and  has  nearly  completed  work  for  a 
doctor's  degree  at  the  Leland  Stan- 
ford University,  Calif.  She  has  served 
as  supervisor  of  health  and  physical 
education  for  girls  in  the  Salt  Lake 
high  schools  for  seventeen  years;  was 
also  supervisor  of  municipal  recrea- 
tion for  the  same  period,  is  respon- 
sible for  the  institution  of  many  pub- 
lic recreation  projects  such  as,  Christ- 
mas cheer  week,  civic  opera,  tennis 
courts,  art  programs,  swimming,  story 
telling,  festivals,  etc.  She  has  been 
active  in  the  auxiliary  organizations 
since  she  was  sixteen  years  old,  served 
in  the  Sunday  School,  the  M.  I.  A.  as 
ward  counselor,  ward  president,  stake 
board  member,  and  was  called  to  the 
General  Board  in  1914.  She  was  a 
member  of  the  Deseret  Gymnasium 
Board  for  eighteen  years,  and  has  as- 
sisted in  the  education  of  her  brothers 
and  sisters. 

SUMMERHAYS,  Margaret,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y. 
W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  is  the  daughter  of  Jos. 
W.  Summerhays  and  was  called  to  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
in  July,  1912,  where  she  gave  splen- 
did service  as  music  director  until 
1920,  when  she  resigned  to  study  music 
abroad. 

TALMAGE,  May  Booth,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
I.  A.,  was  born  Sept.  29,  1868,  in  Al- 
pine City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Rich- 
ard Thornton  Booth  and  Elsie  Edge. 
Her  education  was  obtained  in  the  dis- 
trict schools  and  the  B,  Y.  Academy 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


267 


under  Prof.  Karl  G.  Maeser.  She  was 
married  to  James  Edward  Talmage 
(who  later  became  an  Apostle)  June 
14,  1888,  and  became  the  mother  of 
four  sons  and  four  daughters.  Her 
Church  activities  have  been  as  fol- 
lows: worked  in  the  Primary  Associa- 
tion of  the  Alpine  Stake  and  the  2nd 
Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City;  in  the  Sun- 
day School  of  the  2nd  Ward,  and  in 
the  Relief  Society  of  the  20th  Ward. 
She  was  called  to  the  General  Board 
of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  1892  and  was 
released  in  1930.  For  two  years  she 
supervised  the  M.  I.  A.  activities  in 
the  British  Mission,  and  for  three 
years  presided  over  the  Relief  Soci- 
eties of  the  European  Mission.  Sister 
Talmage's  educational  activities  have 
been  as  follows:  school  teacher  in 
Kaysville,  vice  president  of  the  first 
free  kindergarten  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
vice  president  of  the  B.  Y.  U.  Alumni 
Association,  first  president  of  Parent- 
Teachers'  Association  of  the  Lowell 
School,  charter  member  of  Authors' 
Club  of  Salt  Lake  City,  and  a  charter 
member  of  the  Friendship  Circle. 

TAYLOR,  Elmina  Shepherd,  presi- 
dent of  the  Young  Women's  Mutual 
Improvement    Association    from    1880 


to  1904,  was  born  Sept.  12,  1830,  in 
Middlefield,  Otsego  Co.,  New  York, 
the    daughter    of   David   S.    Shepherd 


and  Rozella  Bailey.  She  was  baptized 
July  5,  1856,  educated  in  the  public 
schools  and  the  Hardwick  Academy 
in  New  York,  and  while  teaching 
school  in  Haverstraw  she  heard  the 
Gospel  and  accepted  it.  On  Aug.  31, 
1856,  she  was  married  to  George  Ham- 
ilton Taylor,  and  on  April  15,  1859, 
she  with  her  husband  started  by  ox 
team  for  Utah,  arriving  there  in  Sep- 
tember. They  settled  in  the  14th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  in  that 
ward  Sister  Taylor  served  as  secre- 
tary of  the  Relief  Society  and  presi- 
dent of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  For  16 
years  she  was  a  member  of  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Relief 
Society  Board.  On  June  19,  1880,  she 
was  appointed  general  president  of 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  She  attended  several 
conventions  of  the  National  Council 
of  Women  and  presided  at  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  meetings  at  the  Chicago  Fair 
in  1893. 

TAYLOR,  Margaret  Young,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y. 
W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  April  24,  1837, 
in  Westport,  Conn.,  the  daughter  of 
Ebenezer  Russell  Young.  She  was 
baptized  when  14  years  of  age,  mar- 
ried to  Pres.  John  Taylor  and  emi- 
grated to  the  Valley  in  1858,  served 
as  secretary  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Relief  Society  and  as  counselor  in  the 
general  presidency  of  the  Y.  L,  M.  I. 
A.  for  seven  years.  In  1887,  on  the 
death  of  her  husband,  she  resigned 
from  the  latter  position. 

TAYLOR,  Nellie  Colebrook,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  May  31,  1848,  in 
Cheltenham,  England.  She  came  with 
her  parents  to  America  at  the  age  of 
two  years.  For  many  years  she  was 
prominent  in  the  stage  life  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Theatre,  beginning  her 
stage  career  when  she  was  sixteen. 
She  left  the  stage  on  her  marriage  to 
Bishop  George  H.  Taylor,  served  as 
president  of  the  14th  Ward  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  for  five  years,  as  counselor  and 


268 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


president  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Y. 
L.  M.  L  A.,  and  was  called  to  the  Gen- 
eral Board  in  1904  and  served  until 
her  death,  which  occurred  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  April  3,  1910. 

TAYLOR,  Rachel  Grant,  a  member 
of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M. 
L  A.,  was  born  Aug.  30,  1878,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  He- 
ber  J.  Grant  and  Lucy  Stringham. 
She  was  baptized  Aug.  30,  1886, 
worked  in  ward  auxiliaries,  was  a 
member  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  Board 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake,  counselor  in 
the  Granite  Stake  Primary,  and  was 
made  a  member  of  the  General  Board 
of  the  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.,  June  29,  1911. 
She  was  married  to  John  Harris  Tay- 
lor, Sept.  20,  1899;  and  became  the 
mother  of  two  children,  namely,  Lucy 
T.  Anderson  and  Heber  Grant  Taylor. 
Sister  Taylor  was  a  pupil  of  Camilla 
Cobb  and  attended  the  18th  Ward 
Seminary,  and  the  L.  D.  S.  University. 
She  served  as  mission  president  of 
Relief  Societies  for  five  and  a  half 
years,  and  has  held  other  responsible 
positions  in  the   Church. 

TEASDALE,      Letitia     Thomas,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  L  A.,  was  born  Oct.  23,  1876, 
in  Franklin,  Idaho,  the  daughter  of 
Preston  Thomas  and  Maria  Hudland. 
Her  early  childhood  was  spent  on  a 
farm,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  she 
entered  the  B.  Y.  College  and  began 
teaching  school  when  eighteen  years 
old.  She  went  with  her  family  to 
Canada,  and  remained  two  years,  help- 
ing in  the  auxiliary  work  in  Cardston. 
She  was  married  to  Apostle  George 
Teasdale,  May  17,  1900,  in  the  Logan 
Temple,  made  her  home  in  Nephi  and 
mothered  five  children.  She  acted  as 
stake  aid  in  the  M.  I.  A.  and  was  a 
Stake  Board  member  of  the  Relief 
Society  of  the  Juab  Stake.  In  1903 
she  made  her  home  in  the  Sugar  House 
Ward,  worked  there  in  the  Relief  So- 
ciety   presidency,    and    was    called    to 


the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  in  1908.  She  was  released  when 
her  work  took  her  to  California. 

THATCHER,  Fanny  Young,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Jan.  25,  1849,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter 
of  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  Lucy 
Decker.  She  was  married  in  March, 
1867,  to  Geo.  W.  Thatcher  as  his  sec- 
ond wife,  and  was  the  mother  of  six 
children.  She  served  as  organist  in 
the  first  tabernacle  built  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  was  president  of  the  18th  Ward 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  for  one  year,  and  was 
called  to  act  as  ti'easurer  on  the  first 
General  Board  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  June 
19,  1880.  She  served  until  her  death, 
Jan.  20,  1892. 

THOMAS,     Marie     Christensen,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  in  American 
Fork,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Niels 
Christensen  (a  handcart  pioneer) 
and  Phoebe  Davis  Chipman.  She  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools  and  the 
University  of  Utah;  served  in  various 
capacities  in  Primary,  Sunday  School 
and  M.  I.  A.  work,  and  was  called  to 
the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.,  in  April,  1927.  She  was  married 
to  Roger  Kendall  Thomas,  and  they 
have  two  children,  namely,  Taylor 
Christensen  Nuttall  and  Frances  Ma- 
rie Boyden. 

TINGEY,  Bertha  K.,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  born  in  Willard,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  John  Hasler  Kunzler  and 
A.  Babette.  She  was  married  to  Jo- 
seph S.  Tingey,  jun.,  June  22,  1911, 
and  is  the  mother  of  four  children. 
She  was  educated  in  the  public  schools 
of  Salt  Lake  City,  completed  the  nor- 
mal course  at  the  University  of  Utah, 
and  taught  school  four  years.  Sister 
Tingey  has  been  active  in  Church 
work  all  her  life,  working  especially 
in  the  Sunday  School  and  the  M.  I. 
A.    She  was  appointed  to  the  General 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


269 


Board  in  July,  1932,  and  has  been  ac- 
tive in  civic  and  political  circles,  es- 
pecially in  the  Salt  Lake  and  state 
council  of   parents   and  teachers. 

TINGEY,  Martha  Jane  Home,  pres- 
ident of  the  Young  Women's  Mutual 
Improvement  Association  from  1905 
to  1929,  was  born  Oct.  15,  1857,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Jo- 
seph Home  and  Mary  Isabella  Hales. 
She  was  educated  in  the  public  schools 
and  the  Deseret  University.  As  a  girl 
she  was  gifted  in  music  and  elocution. 
When  the  General  Board  was  organ- 
ized in  1880  she  was  chosen  as  a  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Elmina  S.  Taylor.  On 
Sept.  30,  1884,  she  was  married  to 
Joseph  S.  Tingey.  She  was  always  ac- 
tive in  the  auxiliaries  of  the  ward  in 
which  she  lived.  Upon  the  death  of 
Sister  Taylor,  Sister  Tingey  was  made 
general  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.,  and  was  sustained  in  that  position 
in  April,  1905.  She  was  one  of  the 
principal  speakers  at  the  Congress  of 
Women  at  the  Chicago  World's  Fair 
in  1893,  and  she  also  attended  several 
conventions  of  the  National  Council 
of  Women.  Because  of  ill  health  she 
resigned  from  the  General  Board  in 
the  spring  of  1929. 

TUDDENHAM,     Alice     Calder,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  March  5, 
1875,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  William  Calder.  She  re- 
ceived her  education  in  the  private 
school  of  Camilla  Cobb  and  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah.  Being  gifted  in  music 
she  served  as  a  member  of  the  Tab- 
ernacle choir  under  Prof.  Evan  Ste- 
phens for  many  years.  She  was  active 
in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  21st  Ward 
as  music  director,  secretary  and 
counselor.  In  1898  she  was  called  to 
act  as  music  dii*ector  for  the  General 
Board.  In  1900  she  was  married  to 
William  J.  Tuddenham  and  became  the 
mother  of  four  children.  She  assisted 
in  the  preparation  of  a  special  song 
book  for  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 


VAN  NOY,  Elsie  Hogan,  general 
secretary  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was 
bom  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  the  daughter 
of  Eric  Hogan  and  Zina  Ellen  Mc- 
Kinney.     She    was    educated    in    the 


public  schools,  the  L.  D.  S.  University 
and  the  Business  College;  began  her 
Church  activities  at  the  age  of  thir- 
teen, teaching  in  the  Sunday  School 
and  the  Primary,  and  later  in  the  Y. 
L.  M.  I.  A.  In  1923-1925  she  filled  a 
mission  to  California,  where  she  was 
corresponding  secretary  and  mission 
supervisor  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  and 
the  Primary  Association.  She  was 
called  to  the  General  Board  in  April, 
1927,  and  appointed  general  secretary 
of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  by  Pres.  Ruth 
May  Fox  in  September,  1929.  She 
has  been  active  in  civic  organizations, 
having  taught  Red  Cross  First  Aid  at 
the  Lion  House  Social  Center  for  the 
past  three  years.  On  June  28,  1935, 
she  was  married  to  William  Ray  Van 
Noy,  and  has  the  privilege  of  helping 
to  rear  his  three  children,  Spencer  R., 
Lynn  C,  and  Colleen  Van  Noy.  She 
organized  the  first  "First  Aid  Club" 
in   Utah  and   was   the   first  president 


270 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


of    the    first    "Instructor's    First    Aid 
Club  of  Utah." 

WALLACE,  Elen,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  Henry  Wallace  and  Elen 
Harper.  She  was  educated  in  the 
public  schools,  the  L.  D.  S.  University 
and  the  University  of  Utah,  served  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
in  the  7th  Ward,  was  a  member  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Board  for  one  year 
and  in  1904  became  a  member  of  the 
General  Board.  In  1905  she  was 
chosen  to  act  as  a  member  of  the  first 
Bee-Hive  Committee,  of  the  first  Sum- 
mer Home  Committee,  and  of  the  M. 
I.  A.  Colors  Committee.  She  saw  the 
beginning  of  numerous  movements 
which  have  since  become  far-reaching. 

WASPE,  Ileen  Ann,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
daughter  of  William  Waspe  and 
Emma  Elizabeth  Smith.  She  was 
educated  in  the  public  schools,  the  L. 
D.  S.  University  and  Business  College 
and  the  B.  Y.  University,  taught  at 
the  L.  D.  S.  U.  for  two  years,  was 
employed  for  many  years  in  Salt  Lake 
City  banks,  and  was  active  since 
fourteen  years  of  age  in  ward  Sun- 
day School,  Primary  and  M.  I.  A.  or- 
ganizations. In  the  Pioneer  Stake  she 
served  on  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  Stake 
Board,  and  as  a  member  of  the  presi- 
dency. She  was  the  first  supervisor 
of  Junior  seminary  work  in  Utah,  was 
called  to  the  European  Mission  in 
1932,  was  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  in  the  British  Mission  for  two 
and  a  half  years,  and  supervisor  of 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  all  of  the  European 
Missions,  and  was  secretary  and  auxil- 
iary supervisor  of  the  French  Mission. 
She  was  chosen  as  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  in  April,  1935. 

WELLS,  Louie,  a  member  of  the 
General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A., 
was  born  Aug.  27,  1862,  in  Salt  Lake 


City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of  Daniel 
H.  and  Emmeline  B.  Wells.  She  was 
the  first  secretary  of  the  General 
Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  1880, 
and  being  a  gifted  writer  she  contrib- 
uted to  the  "Woman's  Exponent,"  "The 
Contributor,"  and  other  publications 
of  the  day.  She  was  a  member  of  the 
Home  Opera  Company  and  worked 
under  Prof.  George  Careless.  She 
died  in  San  Francisco,  Calif.,  May  16, 
1887. 

WELLS,    Margaret    Ann    Newman, 

a  member  of  the  General  Board  of 
the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Dec.  30, 
1892,  in  HoUaday,  Utah,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Thomas  Samuel  Newman  and 
Caroline  Wayman.  She  attended  the 
L.  D.  S.  University  and  Business  Col- 
lege in  Salt  Lake  City,  labored  as  a 
teacher  in  the  Holladay  Ward  Sunday 
School  and  as  stake  secretary  of  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  Cottonwood  Stake. 
In  1914-1916  she  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States,  and  was  mission 
stenographer  for  eighteen  months  of 
this  time.  In  1929-1930  she  filled  an 
eighteen  months'  mission  in  the  East- 
ern States,  and  was  mission  stenog- 
rapher and  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  She  was  called  to  the  General 
Board  in  June,  1921.  For  five  years 
she  was  stenographer  in  the  Presid- 
ing Bishop's  office,  and  for  a  number 
of  years  a  law  stenographer.  Her 
hobby  is  record  keeping  and  gather- 
ing genealogy.  She  was  sent  as  a 
delegate  to  the  Convention  of  the  Na- 
tional Council  of  Women  in  1930, 
which  was  held  in  New  York  City.  She 
is  the  wife  of  Bishop  John  Wells. 

WESSEL,  Elva  Moss,  a  member  of 
the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I. 
A.,  was  born  Oct.  3,  1903,  in  Syracuse, 
Utah,  the  daughter  of  John  W.  Moss 
and  Martha  Burningham.  She  was 
baptized  in  1911  by  Clarence  Smedley, 
received  her  education  in  Davis  Coun- 
ty, the  Weber  College,  and  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah.  She  filled  a  mission 
to    California   in    1922-1924,   and   was 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


271 


called  to  the  General  Board  in  April, 
1926,  as  field  secretary.  After  acting 
in  this  capacity  until  1929,  she  went 
to  New  York  to  attend  the  Columbia 
University.  She  married  William  C. 
Wessel  July  8,  1930,  which  union  has 
been  blessed  with  two  children,  name- 
ly, William  C,  and  Shirley  Marlene. 
She  was  released  from  the  General 
Board  in  June,  1930,  and  since  her 
marriage  has  lived  in  New  York  City, 
where  she  is  at  present  serving  as 
second  counselor  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I. 
A.  in  the  New  York  Stake.  She  has 
held  positions  in  the  Primary,  the 
Sunday  School,  the  Relief  Society  and 
the  M.  I.  A.  since  she  was  fourteen 
years  old.  For  the  past  four  years 
she  has  been  actively  affiliated  with 
the  National  Council  of  Women  of  the 
United  States,  acting  as  corresponding- 
secretary.  She  is  at  present  attend- 
ing the  Columbia  Univei'sity,  majoring 
in  speech  education,  and  is  teaching 
camp  programing  in  that  institution. 

WILLIAMS,  Helen  Spencer,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Nov.  29,  1897,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  daughter  of 
John  D.  Spencer  and  Clarissa  H. 
Young.  She  received  her  education  in 
the  public  schools,  the  L.  D.  S.  Uni- 
versity, the  University  of  Utah,  and 
the  University  of  Southern  California. 
During  her  school  career  she  partici- 
pated in  many  dramatic,  debating  and 
journalistic  activities.  In  the  18th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  she  served  in 
the  Sunday  School,  Primary  and  ward 
choir  organizations.  She  was  also  a 
teacher  in  the  Relief  Society  of  the 
21st  Ward,  and  a  member  of  the  Pri- 
mary and  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  boards  of  En- 
sign Stake.  In  1932,  she  was  called 
to  the  General  Board  of  the  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  Under  the  name  of  Harriet  Page 
she  served  as  a  member  of  the  edi- 
torial staff  of  The  Deseret  News,  and 
conducted  a  period  over  radio  broad- 
casting station  KDYL.  She  married 
Rex  W.  Williams. 


WOODRUFF,     Helen     Winters,     a 

member  of  the  General  Board  of  the 
Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  was  born  Sept.  24, 
1873,  in  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Oscar  and  Mary  Ann 
Winters,  and  is  a  sister  of  Augusta 
W.  Grant.  She  graduated  from  the 
B.  Y.  University,  taught  school 
in  Salina  and  Coalville,  Utah,  and 
later  studied  at  the  University  of 
Utah.  She  was  married  to  Abraham 
Owen  Woodruff  in  1897  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  and  was  called  to  the 
General  Board  in  1898.  She  was  the 
mother  of  four  children.  In  1904  she 
accompanied  her  husband  (Apostle 
Woodruff)  to  Mexico,  where,  in  June, 
in  the  City  of  Mexico,  she  died  of 
smallpox.  Her  husband  died  a  month 
later  in  El  Paso,  Texas,  of  the  same 
disease,  as  he  was  returning  to  the 
United  States  with  his  children. 


GENERAL  BOARD  OF  THE 
PRIMARY  ASSOCIATION 

ANDERSON,  May,  general  superin- 
tendent of  the  Primary  Association  of 
the  Church  since  1925,  was  born  June 


8,  1864,  in  Liverpool,  England,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Scott  Anderson  and  Mary  Bruce. 
She  was  baptized  in  England  by  John 
Nicholson    and    confirmed    by    Orson 


272 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


rELT 


PRIMARY  ASSOCIATION 

FIRST  GENERAL  OFFICERS  OF  THE  PRIMARY  ASSOCIATION 

Louie  B.  Felt,  President;  Matilda  W.  Barrett,  Counselor;  Clara  C.  M. 

Cannon,  Counselor;  Lillie  T.  Freeze,  Secretary;  Mary  Alice  (Minnie) 

Felt  Cutler,  Treasurer. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


273 


Pratt.  In  1883,  with  her  father's  fam- 
ily, she  emig-rated  to  Utah,  crossing- 
the  Atlantic  in  the  ship  "Nevada" 
with  a  company  of  Latter-day  Saints 
in  charge  of  Ben.  E.  Rich.  She  became 
interested  in  Kindergarten  work  and 
studied  kindergarten  methods  under 
Miss  Alice  Chapin  and  in  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah  under  Miss  Mary  C.  May. 
For  two  years  Sister  Anderson  taught 
the  Free  Kindergarten  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  for  four  years  operated  a 
private  kindergarten  and  also  for  four 
years  was  assistant  teacher  in  the 
kindergarten  department  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah.  For  five  years  she 
served  as  a  counselor  to  Louie  B.  Felt 
in  the  Primary  Association  of  the  11th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  in  October, 
1890,  was  sustained  as  general  secre- 
tary of  the  Primary  Association.  From 
this  position  she  was  released  in  1905, 
to  act  as  first  counselor  to  Louie  B. 
Felt,  general  president  of  the  Primary 
Associations  of  the  Church,  and  on 
Oct.  8,  192.5,  she  succeeded  Sister  Felt 
in  that  position.  Sister  Anderson  has 
been  editor  of  the  "Children's  Friend," 
the  organ  of  the  Primary  Association, 
since  1901,  and  in  her  official  capacity 
in  the  Primary  Association  has  visit- 
ed every  stake  in  the  Church  except 
those  just  recently  organized.  Sister 
Anderson  helped  to  establish  the  Pri- 
mary Children's  Hospital  in  Salt  Lake 
City  and  is  president  of  the  board  of 
trustees  of  that  institution.  For  one 
year  she  served  under  Dr.  E.  Gowans  in 
behalf  of  the  Children's  Bureau  of  the 
U.  S.  Department  of  Labor  during  the 
World  war,  working  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Miss  Julia  Lathrop,  being  ap- 
pointed to  serve  as  an  honorary  or 
"dollar  a  year"  worker.  As  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Salt  Lake  committee  of 
child  welfare  (division  of  the  state 
defense  council)  in  April,  1919,  Sis- 
ter Anderson  received  from  the  U.  S. 
Department  of  Labor  a  handsome 
bronze  medal.  For  her  efficient  ser- 
vice, the  U.  S.  Treasury  Department, 
in  1919,  presented  her  with  a  Victory 


Loan  Medal,  made  from  a  captured 
German  cannon.  The  Primary  Asso- 
ciation, over  which  Sister  Anderson 
presides,  has  a  total  membership  of 
nearly  120,000. 

ANDERSON,  Vesta  Erma  Edwards, 

a  member  of  the  general  board  of 
the  Primary  Association,  was  born 
Sept.  1,  1892,  at  Willard,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  John  A.  Edwards  and 
Naomia  Nebeker.  She  was  baptized 
Nov.  3,  1900,  by  her  father,  and  spe- 
cialized in  kindergarten  training, 
graduating  from  the  University  of 
Utah  Kindergarten-Primary  Depart- 
ment in  1916,  after  which  she  became 
an  assistant  to  Miss  Rose  Jones  of 
the  U.  of  U.  Kindergarten  Depart- 
ment. From  1918  to  1919  she  was 
teacher  at  the  Neighborhood  House. 
In  a  Church  capacity  she  served  as 
kindergarten  leader  on  the  Ensign 
Stake  Sunday  School  Board,  mem- 
ber of  the  Religion  Class  of  the  Gran- 
ite Stake  Primary  leader  in\  the 
Granite  Stake  and  became  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  in  1936.  On  June  16,  1920, 
she  was  married  to  Maurice  Ander- 
son in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  and  is 
the  mother  of  four  children,  namely, 
Naomia,  Marjean,  Vesta  and  Maurice 
Edwards. 

BARRAn\  Matilda  M.  W.,  first 
counselor  in  the  general  presidency 
of  the  Primary  Association  from  1880 
to  1888,  was  born  Jan.  17,  1837,  at 
Stockport,  Cheshire,  England,  a 
daughter  of  Samuel  and  Mary  Moor- 
house.  She  was  well  educated  and 
forceful  in  character  and  directed  the 
affairs  of  her  father's  business  in 
England  in  such  a  manner  that  it  was 
said  she  could  bargain  with  the  clev- 
erest men  in  the  community.  She 
joined  the  Church  in  England  and 
endured  much  persecution.  With  her 
young  son  and  a  cousin  (Mrs.  Annie 
D.  Watson)  she  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1876.  On  Oct.  11,  1864,  she  was 
married  to  John  Barratt,  foreman  of 


Vol.    IV.   N.I.    IS 


May  2,   193fi 


274 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


her  father's  factory.  Three  children 
were  born  of  this  marriage,  namely, 
Samuel  (born  Feb.  24,  1866)  and  Ma- 
tilda and  Evangeline,  who  died  in 
infancy.  After  filling  an  honorable 
mission  to  England  her  son  Samuel 
died  Dec.  25,  1900,  in  Satl  Lake  City, 
after  which  in  his  memory  Sister 
Barratt  erected  the  Barratt  Hall  as 
one  of  the  buildings  connected  with 
the  L.  D.  S.  College  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
at  a  cost  of  ?24,000.  Sister  Barratt 
did  not  long  survive  her  son,  but 
died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  April  14,  1902. 

BEEBE,  Clara  Woodruff,  a  coun- 
selor in  the  general  presidency  and 
a  member  of  the  general  board  of 
the  Primary  Association  from  1904  to 
1927,  was  born  July  23,  1868,  in  Salt 


Lake  City,  a  daughter  of  Wilford 
Woodruff  and  Emma  Smith.  She  was 
a  student  of  the  Salt  Lake  City 
schools  and  of  the  University  of  Des- 
eret.  She  acted  as  secretary  of  the 
Primary  Association  in  the  Farmers' 
Ward  at  the  age  of  14,  and  served 
for  three  years,  was  president  of  the 
20th  Ward  Primary  Association  in 
1895-1898,  and  a  member  of  the  Salt 


Lake  Stake  Primary  Board  until 
called  to  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association,  serving  as  sec- 
ond counselor  from  1905  to  1925.  She 
was  a  perfect  hostess  and  had  charge 
of  all  special  social  events  on  the 
board.  As  a  result  of  her  activity 
152,331  baptisms  for  the  dead  were 
performed  by  children  of  the  Pri- 
mary. She  was  also  a  member  of 
the  Salt  Lake  Civic  Center  from  April 
19,  1917,  to  1921,  serving  as  treas- 
urer and  a  member  of  the  board  of 
control.  On  Aug.  3,  1887,  she  was 
married  to  Ovando  C.  Beebe  and  was 
the  mother  of  eight  children,  namely, 
Vedi  Clare,  Woodruff  Collins,  Emma, 
George  Rogers,  Hester,  Blanch  W.. 
Margaret  and  Ruth.  (See  Children's 
Friend,  Vol.  24,  p.  427;  Vol.  26,  p. 
365.) 

BEELEY,  Glen  .lohnson,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  1926  to  1929.  (See 
the  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  group  of  biog- 
raphies.) 

BENNETT,  Frances  Marian  Grant, 

a  member  of  the  general  board  of 
the  Piimary  Association,  was  born 
Sept.  23,  1899,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  Pres.  Heber  J. 
Grant  and  Emily  Wells.  She  was 
baptized  Sept.  22,  1907,  by  her  father. 
She  took  an  A.  B.  degree  from  the 
University  of  Utah  in  1921,  studied 
music  at  home  and  for  two  years  in 
Boston,  Mass.,  under  F'elix  Fox  and 
Carlo  Buonamici  and  was  also  a  spe- 
cial student  of  music  at  Radcliffe  Col- 
lege at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  for  two 
years.  After  returning  from  the  East, 
she  taught  music  at  the  University 
of  Utah.  She  was  a  member  of  the 
Ensign  Stake  Primary  Board  for 
thirteen  years  before  being  called  to 
the  general  board,  March  27,  1935.  On 
Sept.  6,  1922,  she  was  married  to  Wal- 
lace F.  Bennett  and  is  the  mother  of 
five  children,  namely,  Wallace  G)ant, 
Rosemary,  David  Wells,  Frances  and 
Robert  Foster. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


275 


BENNETT,     Marjorie     Gowans,     a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association,  was  born  June 
7,  1899,  at  Logan,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Dr.  E.  T.  Gowans  and  Mary  C.  Ly- 
man. She  was  baptized  June  7,  1907, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  graduated 
from  the  East  High  School  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  was  a  student  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  for  two  years  and 
graduated  from  the  Teachers'  College 
at  Columbia  University.  She  taught 
in  the  Junior  and  Senior  high  schools 
of  Salt  Lake  City,  at  the  Deseret 
Gymnasium,  the  L.  D.  S.  High  School, 
the  Utah  State  College  and  at  the 
University  of  Utah.  She  was  also  a 
teacher  in  the  junior  and  senior  high 
schools  in  Denver,  Colorado.  On  July 
19,  1928,  she  was  married  to  Henry 
William  Bennett. 

BENNION,  Eliza  Slade,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  1901  to  1934,  was 
born  Oct.  10,  1854,  in  Somersetshire, 
England,  a  daughter  of  William  and 
Amelia  Slade.  Her  family  emigrated 
to  America  in  1859,  but  the  father 
died  in  Pennsylvania.  His  widow, 
with  a  family  of  six,  came  to  Utah 
in  1863;  two  of  the  children  died  on 
the  plains.  Sister  Eliza  attended  the 
district  schools,  was  a  student  of  the 
University  of  Utah  in  1875-1877,  and 
again  in  1880,  for  one  year.  She  re- 
turned to  the  University  in  1896  and 
graduated  with  a  Normal  Diploma 
in  1898.  She  continued  off  and  on 
until  she  had  attended  the  University 
of  Utah  for  16  years — a  remarkable 
record.  She  was  a  teacher  in  the 
Taylorsville  and  Salt  Lake  City 
schools.  In  1871  she  became  the  first 
secretary  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  19th 
Wai'd,  Salt  Lake  City,  Sunday  School 
teacher,  president  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
and  was  a  member  of  the  Granite 
Stake  Primary  board.  She  became  a 
member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  Nov.  7,  1901,  a 
position  which  she  held  for  83  years. 


Sister  Bennion  was  also  an  instruc- 
tor in  the  Relief  Society  of  the  12th- 
13th  Ward  in  Salt  Lake  City,  one 
of  the  first  members  of  the  Authors' 
Club  and  a  charter  member  of  the 
Friendship  Circle.  In  1882,  she  mar- 
ried Alfred  Bennion  and  became  the 
mother  of  eight  children,  four  of  whom 
survived  her,  namely,  Fred,  Earl, 
Desla  and  Willai-d.  Her  son  Willard 
filled  a  mission  to  England  in  1912- 
1914  and  in  1913  she  joined  him  there, 
laboring  as  a  missionary  for  one 
year.  Sister  Bennion  possessed  an 
alert  mind,  was  unusually  pei'sever- 
ing  and  exceptionally  active  physic- 
ally.    She  died  Oct.  27,  1936. 

BENNION,      Katherine      Snow,     a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association,  was  born  Sept. 
18,  1904,  at  Manti,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Warren  C.  Snow  and  Kate  Craw- 
ford. She  was  baptized  in  1914  in 
the  Manti  Temple.  She  graduated 
from  the  L.  D.  S.  High  School,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  received  a  B.  A. 
degree  from  the  University  of  Utah 
in  1926.  She  was  a  kindergarten 
teacher  in  the  Longfellow  School, 
Salt  Lake  City,  in  1926-1927,  taught 
school  at  Lewiston,  Utah,  in  1927- 
1928,  and  was  an  instructor  in  the 
Junior  Seminary  of  the  East  and  West 
Jordan  Stakes  in  1929-1932  and  in  the 
Senior  Seminary  of  the  Jordan  High 
School  in  1932-1933.  She  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  East  Jordan  Stake  Pri- 
mary board,  superintendent  of  the 
Jordan  Stake  Primary  board  and  in 
November,  1935,  became  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association.  She  was  married  to  Dr. 
Milton  Lynn  Bennion  (superintendent 
of  the  L.  D.  S.  Junior  Seminaries)  in 
September,  1927,  and  is  the  mother 
of  three  children:  Annett,  Carolyn 
and  John. 

BRADFORD,  Stella  Paul,  sustained 
a  member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary   Association,   was  born   June 


276 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


20,  1885,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Joshua  Hughes  Paul  and 
Fanny  Pettigrew.  She  was  baptized 
Sept.  4,  1893,  by  Joseph  Christensen, 
graduated  from  the  Normal  Course 
at  the  University  of  Utah  in  1905  and 
was  a  student  of  Columbia  University, 
New  York.  She  was  active  in  the  10th 
and  11th  wards,  Salt  Lake  City,  in 
her  girlhood,  presided  over  the  Relief 
Society  in  New  York  City  for  five 
years  (1918-1923),  was  regent  of  the 
Daughteis  of  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
regent  of  the  Daughters  of  Utah  Pio- 
neers, instructor  in  musical  direction 
for  the  general  boards  of  the  Relief 
Society  and  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.,  and 
chorister  of  the  University  Ward  Sun- 
day School  in  1925-1926.  With  her 
husband  and  Pres.  Charles  A.  Callis, 
she  visited  all  the  branches  of  the 
Southern  States  Mission,  singing 
songs  for  the  saints.  She  was  also  a 
genealogical  worker.  On  June  3,  li>10, 
she  was  married  to  William  Clive 
Bradford.  She  had  no  children  of 
her  own,  but  two  baby  boys,  who  were 
named  William  Paul  Bradford  and 
David  Pettigrew  Bradford  were 
adopted  and  sealed  to  her  and  her 
husband.  Sister  Bradford  died  April 
1,  1926. 

BROWNING,  Norma  Fenton,  or- 
ganist of  the  general  board  of  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1904  to  1909, 
is  a  graduate  from  the  kindergarten 
department  of  the  University  of  Utah, 
receiving  her  diploma  in  June,  1907. 
She  is  an  expert  pianist  and  studied 
music  for  many  years.  She  is  the  wife 
of  Wm.  J.  Browning. 

BURNHAM,  Euphemia  Jane  Irvine. 

recording  secretary  of  the  general 
board  of  the  Primary  Association  for 
a  short  time  in  1896-1897,  was  born 
Jan.  23,  1871,  at  Newcastle-on-Tyne, 
England,  a  daughter  of  John  Irvine 
and  Mary  Eliza  Rutherford.  She  was 
baptized  just  before  her  eighth  birth- 
day by  Royal  B.  Young,  and  immedi- 


ately afterwards  the  family  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah.  Sister  Burnham  acted  for 
some  years  as  counselor  in  the  Relief 
Society  of  the  3rd  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  was  also  active  in  the  Sun- 
day school  and  M.  I.  A.  On  June  6, 
1900,  she  was  married  to  George 
Francis  Burnham  and  became  the 
mother  of  three  sons  and  one  daugh- 
ter, namely,  Francis  Irvine,  Paul 
Franklin,  Leon,  and  Sarah  Louise.  Her 
three  sons  filled  honorable  missions, 
one  to  New  Zealand  and  two  to  Ger- 
many. Her  husband,  George  F.  Burn- 
ham, died  in  October,  1907,  and  the 
little  daughter  died  when  only  two 
days  old.  Sister  Burnham  died  March 
23,  1928. 

BURTON,    Mary    I.    F.    Young,    a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1913  to 
1917  and  tieasurer  from  1916  to  1917, 
was  born  Oct.  22,  1885,  at  Governor's 
Island,  New  York,  a  daughter  of 
Richard  W.  Young  and  Minerva  Rich- 
ards. She  was  a  graduate  of  the  High 
School  and  received  a  Kindergarten- 
Primary  diploma  from  the  University 
of  Utah.  She  was  a  member  of  the 
Ensign  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board 
and  also  a  teacher  in  the  auxiliary  or- 
ganizations. She  also  served  as  or- 
ganist of  the  20th  Ward  Sunday 
School.  On  June  12,  1924,  she  was 
married  to  Arthur  Taylor  Burton  and 
became  the  mother  of  one  son,  Tru- 
man Young  Burton. 

CAHOON,  Matilda  Watts,  chorister 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primaiy 
Association  since  1911,  was  boin  at 
Murray,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  George 
C.  Watts  and  Wilhelmine  Jensen.  She 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old  by 
Joseph  L.  Rawlins.  She  was  a  song 
leader  in  Primary  when  only  four 
years  old  and  secretary  of  the  organ- 
ization when  still  quite  young,  served 
as  counselor  in  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  super- 
intendent of  Religion  Class  and  served 
as  organist  in  ward  anil  Sunday  school 


BIOGRAPHICAL    ENCYCLOPEDIA 


277 


for  lo  years.  She  was  a  member  of 
a  Stake  Board  of  Primary  for  two 
years  and  has  been  a  member  and 
chorister  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  for  the  past  24 
years.  She  studied  in  the  University 
of  Utah  four  years  and  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Chicago  one  year,  taught 
in  the  public  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City 
25  years.  She  was  a  member  of  the 
Legislature  (House  of  Representa- 
tives) in  1931,  being  the  first  lady 
delegate  from  Salt  Lake  County.  On 
June  24,  1908,  she  was  married  to 
Leonard  Cahoon  and  became  the 
mother  of  two  daughters,  Virginia  and 
Janice.  Her  husband  died  April  1, 
1931,  and  she  is  at  present  teacher  of 
music  in  the  Roosevelt  High  School, 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  is  also  a  student 
of  the  University  of  Utah,  working 
toward  a  degree. 

CANFIELD,  Rosalthe  (Rose),  a 
member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1892  to 
1895,  was  born  Dec.  30,  1841,  at  Os- 
sian,  Allegany  Co.,  N.  Y..  a  daughter 
of  Israel  Canfield  and  Annis  Bisbee. 
Sister  Rosalthe  was  baptized  June  21, 
1863,  by  James  McGaw,  and  taught 
school  in  1860  before  coming  West. 
She  arrived  in  Utah  by  ox  team  in 
1863  and  began  teaching  school  in 
Utah  that  year.  She  was  appointed 
a  teacher  in  the  Relief  Society  of  We- 
ber County  in  December,  1867,  and 
made  treasurer  of  the  organization  in 
March,  1869.  In  November,  1869,  she 
was  called,  in  connection  with  her  sis- 
ter Harriet  Canfield  Brown,  to  take 
charge  of  the  Cooperative  Store,  built 
and  established  by  the  sisters  of  We- 
ber County.  In  May,  1879,  she  was 
appointed  treasurer  of  the  Weber 
Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board  and  in  Sep- 
tember of  the  same  year  became  sec- 
retary. In  September,  1880,  she  was 
chosen  as  second  counselor  to  Joseph- 
ine R.  West,  president  of  the  Weber 
Stake  Primary  Boa)d,  and  in  Septem- 
ber, 1897,  was  made  fii'st  counselor. 
On  .June  21,  1899.  Sister  Canfield  was 


appointed  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  of  the  Ogden  5th  Ward,  and 
on  Oct.  21,  1899,  she  was  called  to 
preside  over  the  Weber  Stake  Primary 
Board.  In  1892,  she  became  a  coun- 
selor to  Elizabeth  Y.  Stanford  of  the 
Weber  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board. 
On  Oct.  7,  1892,  she  was  appointed 
an  aid  on  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  and  served  until 
released  Oct.  4,  1895.  Sister  Canfield 
died  April  7,  1931. 

CANNON,  Clara  C.  M.,  a  counselor 
in  the  general  presidency  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1880  to  1896, 
was  born  April  21,  1839,  at  Westfield, 
Mass.,  a  daughter  of  Ambrose  Todd 
Moses  and  Lydia  Ensign.  She  was 
a  counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Primary  Board  for 
14  years  and  a  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Relief 
Society  for  some  time.  At  the  open- 
ing of  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  she  was 
called  as  an  ordinance  worker  and 
served  in  that  capacity  seven  years. 
She  was  the  first  president  of  the 
14th  Ward  Primary  Association  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  In  1859  she  was 
married  to  William  H.  Mason  who  died 
nine  years  later,  leaving  her  with  two 
children.  On  June  16,  1875,  she  was 
married  to  Angus  M.  Cannon  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  three  more  chil- 
dren. Sister  Cannon  died  Aug.  21, 
1926. 

CAPENER,  Ella  Smith,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  Primary  from 
1913  to  1923,  was  born  July  2,  1876, 
at  Soldier  Canyon,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Wm.  Henry  Jex  Smith  and  Mary 
M.  Garn.  She  was  baptized  in  Sep- 
tember, 1896,  and  received  her  early 
education  in  Tooele,  Park  City  and 
Centerville,  Utah.  She  was  graduated 
from  the  University  of  Utah  and 
taught  school  in  Davis  County.  In 
1899  she  was  married  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  to  Joseph  Aaron  Capener  of 
Centerville.     The    familv    resided    at 


278 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Riverside,  Idaho,  where  three  sons 
were  born  to  them,  namely,  Leiand 
Smith,  Joseph  Ray  and  Eugene  Jex. 
When  her  youngest  son  was  only  nine 
months  old,  her  husband  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  England.  This  seemed 
a  problem  as  there  was  a  moi'tgage  on 
the  home,  but  Sister  Capener  turned 
to  her  former  vocation  and  was  prin- 
cipal of  the  Riverside  school  for  five 
years.  She  also  taught  Sunday  School 
and  Religion  Class  and  served  on  the 
stake  boards  of  Relief  Society  in  the 
Malad  and  later  in  the  Bear  River 
stakes.  In  1913  the  family  moved  to 
Salt  Lake  City  and  on  Nov.  21  of  that 
year  Sister  Capener  was  appointed  a 
member  of  the  general  board  of  Pri- 
mary, having  previously  served  as 
stake  president  of  Primary  Associa- 
tion in  the  Bear  River  stake.  A 
daughter  (Mildred)  was  born  to  Bro. 
and  Sister  Capener  March  20,  1915, 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  Sister  Capener  re- 
signed from  the  Primary  Board,  Oct. 
10,   1923. 

CARD,  Zina  Y.,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation from  1906  to  1922,  was  born 
April  3,  1851,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
and  Zina  Diantha  Huntington.  She 
was  the  first  president  of  the  Primary 
Association  in  the  Utah  Stake,  hold- 
ing that  position  from  1878  to  1884. 
In  1868  she  was  married  to  Thomas 
Williams,  who  died  in  1874,  leaving 
her  with  one  son.  Sterling  Williams. 
In  May,  1884,  she  was  married  to 
Charles  Ora  Card,  president  of  the 
Cache  Stake,  and  with  him  became  a 
founder  of  the  L.  D.  S.  Mission  in  Can- 
ada, and  presided  over  the  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  in  the  later  organized  Alberta 
Stake.  She  became  the  mother  of 
two  sons  and  one  daughter,  namely, 
Joseph  Young,  Orson  Riga  and  Zina 
Young  Card.  Sister  Card  died  Jan. 
31,  1931.  (See  also  Bio.  Ency.  Vol. 
3,  p.  338.  Young  Woman's  Journal, 
Vol.  4,  p.  50.) 


CARELESS,  Jane  Davis,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  a  short  time,  but  who  re- 
signed in  order  to  devote  her  time  to 
Temple  work,  was  born  January  3, 
1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Edward  Wm.  Davis  and  Jemima 
Nightingale.  She  was  baptized  Aug. 
3,  1866,  by  Nathan  Davis,  and  edu- 
cated in  the  public  schools  and  the 
Doremus  School  in  Salt  Lake  City.  She 
was  set  apart  as  an  ordinance  worker 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  by  Pres.  Jo- 
seph F.  Smitii  on  June  2,  1911.  On 
March  27,  18!--8,  she  was  married  to 
Prof.  George  Careless  in  the  Logan 
Temple  and  encouraged  him  in  his  mu- 
sical work  until  his  death,  Dec.  16, 
1932. 

CHRISTENSEN,    Olive    Derbridge, 

a  member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association,  was  sustained 
as  assistant  secretary  Sept.  24,  1897, 
and  as  genei'al  secretary  Dec.  29,  1905. 
She  was  honorably  released  from 
membership  on  the  board  May  31, 
1911.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  89.) 

CLAYTON,  Cornelia  Home,  secre- 
tary of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1888  to  1890, 
was  born  Dec.  19,  1855,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Joseph 
Home  and  Mary  Isabella  Hales.  She 
was  baptized  in  October,  1865,  by  her 
father  and  was  a  student  of  Prof.  John 
Morgan's  college  in  the  14th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City;  also  president  of  the 
Primary  Association  of  the  14th  Ward 
two  years.  She  was  a  teacher  of  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  and  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation of  the  18th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  president  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A, 
of  the  Provo  4th  Ward  for  seven  years 
and  president  of  the  Utah  Stake  Pri- 
mary Association  for  ten  years.  Sister 
Clayton  was  a  member  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Tabernacle  choir  six  years  under 
Prof.  George  Careless,  matron  of  the 
Relief  Society  home  for  working  girls 
eight  years,  and  the  first  business 
manager  of  the  "Woman's  Exponent," 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


279 


a  position  which  she  held  until  long 
after  Mrs.  Emmeline  B.  Wells  became 
editor.  Sister  Clayton  was  also  a 
member  of  the  Wasatch  Literary  Club 
as  early  as  1872,  secretary  of  the  first 
Woman's  Suffrage  Association  organ- 
ized in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  a  member 
of  the  Provo  City  school  board.  On 
Nov.  29,  1875,  she  was  married  to 
James  Leroy  Clayton  and  became  the 
mother  of  three  sons  and  one  daugh- 
ter, namely,  Clarence  Leroy,  Raymond 
H.,  William  H.,  and  Margaret. 

COBB,  Camilla  Clara  Meith,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  for  several  years, 
was  born  May  24,  1843,  at  Dresden, 
Saxony,  Germany,  a  daughter  of  Karl 
Benjamin  Imanuel  Meith  and  Henri- 
etta Christiana  Backham.  She  was 
one  of  the  first  eight  converts  baptized 
in  Dresden  and  emigrated  to  America 
in  1857,  with  her  brother-in-law,  Karl 
G.  Maeser,  and  came  to  Utah  shortly 
afterwards.  Her  father,  a  prominent 
educator  in  Germany,  gave  his  chil- 
dren every  opportunity  possible  for 
education.  She  taught  school  with  Dr. 
Maeser  in  Salt  Lake  City  and  in  1867 
went  to  New  Jersey,  where  she  stud- 
ied kindergarten  with  Dr.  Dorrus  of 
Newark,  N.  J.,  who  conducted  the 
first  kindergarten  school  in  America. 
Sister  Cobb  was  the  first  kindergarten 
teacher  in  Utah,  starting  her  work  in 
Pres.  Brigham  Young's  private  school 
house,  which  stood  where  the  Brans- 
ford  Apartments  ai-e  now  located  at 
the  Eagle  Gate,  Salt  Lake  City.  Sis- 
ter Cobb  was  a  teacher  of  rare  ability 
and  magnetism,  possessed  a  beautiful 
voice  and  was  one  of  the  most  lovable, 
self-sacrificing  and  charming  women 
among  the  leading  sisters  of  the 
Church.  On  June  18,  1878,  she  was 
appointed  a  counselor  to  Ellen  S. 
Clawson,  president  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  Primary  Board,  the  first  stake 
Primary  board  organized  in  the 
Church,  and  later  was  president  of 
that    organization    for    a    number    of 


years.  On  Nov.  14,  1864,  she  was  mar- 
ried to  James  T.  Cobb,  a  graduate  of 
both  Dartmouth  and  Amherst  col- 
leges and  a  newspaper  man  of  Salt 
Lake  City.  She  became  the  mother  of 
seven  childi'en,  three  of  whom,  Ives  E., 
Rufus  K.,  and  James  Kent  Cobb  sur- 
vived her.  Sister  Cobb  died  Oct.  16, 
1933,  at  the  age  of  90  years.  (See 
Juvenile  Instructor,  Vol.  65,  p.  527; 
Children's  Friend,  Vol.  27,  p.  32.) 

CORNWALL,  Lenore,  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation since  1932,  is  a  daughter  of 
Alma  M.  Cornwall  and  Lenora  Jane 
Hill.  She  graduated  from  the  Gran- 
ite High  School,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah, 
in  1921,  received  a  B.A.  degree  from 
the  University  of  Utah  and  taught 
school  for  some  time.  She  was  or- 
ganist and  teacher  in  a  ward  Primary 
Association,  officer  in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.,  and  later  a  member  of  a  stake  Y. 
L.  M.  I.  A.  board.  She  filled  a  mis- 
sion in  California  from  June,  1930, 
to  August,  1932,  during  which  she 
served  as  mission  supervisor  of  Pri- 
mary Associations  and  president  of 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 

CRAWFORD,  Jane  Vilate  Romney, 

organist  and  member  of  the  general 
board  of  the  Primary  Association 
since  May  21,  1919,  was  born  Dec.  31, 
1883,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Heber  John  Romney 
and  Kate  Ada  Miller.  She  was  bap- 
tized Jan.  5,  1892,  by  Elder  Cowan, 
graduated  from  the  Salt  Lake  High 
School,  was  a  student  of  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah  and  took  private  instruc- 
tion in  music,  art  and  kindergarten 
work.  She  filled  a  mission  in  the 
Northern  States  in  1905-1906,  and,  in 
company  with  her  husband,  filled  a 
mission  to  England  in  1911-1913.  She 
was  an  officer  in  the  Ensign  Stake 
Primary  Association,  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
and  Relief  Society,  and  since  her  girl- 
hood has  been  an  active  member  of 
the  20th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City  (espe- 


280 


LATTEK-DAV  SAINT 


cially  as  orjjanist  and  music  leader). 
Her  grandfather,  George  Romney,  was 
Bishop  of  the  ward  for  a  number  of 
years.  Sister  Crawford  has  been  an 
instructor  of  music  and  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Church  Music  Com- 
mittee and  as  a  member  of  the  Na- 
tional Music  Week  Committee  on 
three  different  occasions.  On  June 
16,  1909,  she  was  married  to  Alexan- 
der Clyde  Crawford  by  John  R.  Win- 
der in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 

CRITCHLOW,     Florence     Snow,     a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  Nov.  16, 
1906,  to  Oct.  10,  1907,  was  born  Aug. 
7,  1870,  at  Brigham  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Lorenzo  Snow  and  Phoebe 
Woodruff.  She  was  baptized  Aug.  7, 
1878,  by  Thomas  Wild.  She  studied  at 
the  Brigham  Young  College  and  at 
the  Utah  State  Agricultural  College. 
She  was  secretary  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation of  the  Brigham  City  3rd 
Ward  from  1883  to  1888,  and  a  member 
and  later  counselor  in  the  Ensign  Stake 
Primary  Board.  In  1912-1914  she  ser- 
ved in  the  presidency  of  the  Y.  L.  M.  L 
A.  at  Ocean  Park,  Calif.  She  has  been 
genealogist  for  the  Lorenzo  Snow 
Family  Organization  since  1922,  vice 
president  of  the  Richard  Snow  Family 
Organization  and  a  member  of  the 
Temple  committee  of  the  Wilford 
Woodruff  Genealogical  Organization. 
She  was  owner  and  manager  of  a  Real 
Estate  office  in  California  from  1912 
to  1919.  On  May  15,  1895,  she  was 
married  to  John  Quincy  Critchlow,  and 
is  the  mother  of  one  daughter  (Lu- 
cille). 

CUTLER,  Mary  Alice  (Minnie)  Felt, 

first  treasurer  of  the  general  board  of 
the  Primary  Association,  was  born 
March  29,  1863,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  Nathaniel  Henry 
Felt  and  Eliza  Ann  Preston.  She  was 
baptized  July  3,  1873,  by  Nathan  Da- 
vis and  was  a  student  of  Miss  Mary 
Cook's  school  in  the  Social  Hall.  She 
had  considerable  dramatic  ability  and 


took  part  in  amateur  theatricals,  play- 
ing the  role  of  "Little  Buttercup,"  in 
an  early  production  of  "Pinafore." 
Willingly  she  gave  of  her  musical  and 
other  talents  in  the  service  of  the 
Church.  She  was  secretary  of  the 
17th  Ward  Sunday  School,  Salt  Lake 
City,  for  several  years,  and  treasurer 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  1880  to  1890.  On 
Aug.  12,  1884,  she  was  married  to  Jo- 
seph Gregory  Cutler,  and  became  the 
mother  of  eight  children,  namely,  Jo- 
seph Preston,  Everett  William,  Heber 
Nathaniel,  Dudley  Robinson,  Vaughn 
Allen,  Adaline,  Ray  Temple  and  Min- 
nie.    Sister  Cutler  died  April  25,  1895. 

DAVIS,  Helen,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Associ- 
ation since  1913,  is  a  daughter  of  Al- 
bert W.  Davis  and  Melissa  Jane  Lamb- 
son.  She  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old  by  her  father,  who  was  bish- 
op of  Center  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
for  many  years.  Sister  Davis  held 
offices  in  the  ward  organizations  from 
her  early  girlhood,  and  in  1904  was 
called  to  serve  on  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Sunday  School  Board.  She  was  ap- 
pointed assistant  kindergarten  teacher 
in  Center  Ward  Sunday  School,  Nov. 
23,  1902,  this  being  the  first  kinder- 
garten class  organized  in  the  ward. 
She  worked  in  this  class  until  appoint- 
ed kindergarten  supervisor  on  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  Sunday  school  board.  On 
Jan.  27,  1924,  she  was  appointed  kin- 
dei'garten  supervisor  on  the  Liberty 
Stake  Sunday  school  board.  She  was 
called  to  be  a  member  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Stake  Primary  Board,  Aug.  6,  1905, 
and  became  a  member  of  the  general 
board  Nov.  28,  1913,  which  position 
she  still  holds.  Sister  Davis  was 
tieasurer  of  the  Utah  State  Kinder- 
garten Association  for  six  years  and 
a  Red  Cross  aid  during  the  World  war. 
She  graduated  from  the  University  of 
Utah  in  1908.  She  spent  three  months 
in  Seattle,  Washington,  during  the 
Va\v  there,  assisting  the  missionaries, 
and  was  one  of  the  hostesses  on   the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


2S1 


Utah  Day,  when,  accompanying  her 
relative,  Alonzo  P.  Kesler,  one  of  Gov- 
ernor Spry's  staff,  she  took  part  in 
the  ceremonies  as  a  disting-uished  rep- 
resentative of  Utah.  Sister  Davis  is 
a  school  teacher  by  profession. 

DEE,  Genet  Bingham,  librarian  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation, w^as  born  Dec.  18,  1883,  at 
Wilson,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Jedediah  Grant  Bingham  and  Mar- 
garet McCormick  Petterson.  She  was 
baptized  in  July,  1892,  by  Parley 
Pratt  Bingham  and  received  her  edu- 
cation in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  University 
of  Utah  and  the  Columbia  University 
in  New  York  City.  She  taught  school 
in  Ogden  for  a  time  and  was  deputy 
county  clerk  of  Weber  County,  Utah, 
from  1907  to  1910.  She  was  a  member 
of  the  Weber  Stake  Sunday  school 
board  from  1902  to  1910,  and  of  the 
Pioneer  Stake  Sunday  school  boai-d 
in  1916.  She  was  set  apart  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  by  Anthony  W. 
Ivins  in  April,  1916,  served  as  treas- 
urer of  that  organization  from  1917 
to  1920,  and  as  secretary  from  1918 
to  1920.  She  is  a  member  of  the 
Daughters  of  the  Revolution,  of  the 
Chi  Delta  Phi,  a  national  literary  so- 
rority, and  of  the  League  of  Westei'n 
Writers.  She  has  been  secretary  and 
treasurer  of  the  Bingham  Family  Or- 
ganization (a  genealogical  unit)  since 
1924,  and  still  acts  in  that  capacity. 
On  Sept.  10,  1912,  she  was  married  to 
Ernest  Leon  Dee  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  and  is  the  mother  of  one  son, 
David  Bingham  Dee. 

EASTMOND,      Margaret      Hull,     a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1904  to 
1917,  and  assistant  secretary  from 
1905  to  1909,  was  born  Feb.  9,  1878. 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Thomas  Hull  and  Margaret  C. 
Swan.  She  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  of  age,  graduated  fi'om 
the    Salt    Lake    City   High    School    in 


1897,  received  a  diploma  in  Home  Eco- 
nomics from  the  Teachers'  College  at 
the  Columbia  University  in  1911  and 
took  a  B.A.  degree  from  the  Brigham 
Young  University  in  1927.  She  has 
held  positions  in  several  of  the  Church 
auxiliary  organizations,  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  old  Salt  Lake  Stake  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  board,  of  the  Ensign  Stake 
Sunday  school  board,  and  is  chorister 
of  the  Utah  Stake  Relief  Society.  She 
was  a  teacher  in  the  Salt  Lake  City 
schools,  teacher  in  the  Teachers'  Col- 
lege of  the  Columbia  University  two 
summers  and  a  teacher  at  the  B.  Y. 
U.  for  years.  On  April  2,  1913,  she 
was  married  to  Elbert  Hindley  East- 
mond  and  became  the  mother  of  two 
sons,  namely,  Thomas  Hull  and  Elbert 
John  Eastmond. 

ERICKSEN,  Edna  Clark,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  since  1920,  was  born  Nov. 
19,  1889,  at  Auburn,  Wyoming,  a 
daughter  of  Hyrum  D.  Clark  and 
Elizabeth  Porter.  She  was  baptized 
in  the  summer  of  1898  by  her  father, 
received  her  education  at  the  Brigham 
Young  College  at  Logan,  and  the  L. 
D.  S.  High  School  and  the  University 
of  Utah  in  Salt  Lake  City.  She  was 
a  counselor  in  the  Relief  Society  of 
the  Murdock  Branch,  Beaver  Co., 
Utah,  in  1912-1915,  acting  matron  of 
the  Beaver  High  School,  a  member 
of  the  Davis  Stake  Sunday  school 
board,  and  became  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation Feb.  13,  1920.  Sister  Erick- 
sen  was  a  member  of  the  Utah  State 
Legislature  in  1933-1935,  chairman  of 
the  American  Home  Division  of  the 
State  Federation  of  Women's  Clubs 
in  1932-1935,  state  chairman  of  the 
Better  Homes  Organization  in  1932- 
1936,  member  of  the  board  of  control 
of  the  Utah  Consumers  and  Welfare 
League  and  of  the  Salt  Lake  Civic 
Center  Board  (four  years).  Sister 
Ericksen  was  vocal  soloist  in  the  old 
Britain  Parish  church  at  Williams- 
burg, Virginia,  in  the  summe)-  of  1928 


282 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


and  is  a  writer  for  "Children's 
Friend."  On  June  8,  1910,  she  was  mar- 
ried to  Dr.  Ephraim  Edward  Erick- 
sen  of  the  University  of  Utah,  and 
is  the  mother  of  four  sons  and  one 
daughter,  namely,  Stanford  Clark, 
Sheldon  Danielsen,  Ephraim  Gordon, 
Howard  Bendt,  and  Edna  Mai'garet. 

EVANS,  Beatrice  Cannon,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association,  was  born  May  18, 
1894,  at  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daug-hter  of  John  M.  Cannon  and  Zina 
Bennion.  She  was  baptized  May  18, 
1902,  by  her  father,  was  educated  in 
the  L.  D.  S.  University,  and  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah,  and,  after  graduation, 
took  several  extension  coui-ses.  She 
was  a  teacher  in  the  Forest  Dale  Sun- 
day school  in  1901-1904,  a  teacher  in 
Primary  Association  and  a  member  of 
the  Granite  Stake  Sunday  school  board 
in  1913-1914.  She  became  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  Dec.  5,  1913,  and  served 
for  several  yeai's.  On  Sept.  9,  1920, 
she  was  married  to  David  W.  Evans, 
and  is  the  mother  of  five  sons,  namely, 
David  Cannon,  Robert  C,  Edmund  C, 
Wayne  C,  and  Carleton  C. 

EVANS,  Irma  Bitner,  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation from  1911  to  1913,  was  born 
Sept.  14,  1888,  at  Holladay,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Breneman  Barr  Bitner  and 
Martina  Haslett.  She  was  baptized 
when  eight  years,  educated  in  the 
public  school  at  Holladay,  at  the  L. 
D.  S.  Colleg'e,  and  at  the  University 
of  Utah,  graduating?  from  the  latter 
institution  with  a  diploma  in  physical 
education  in  1910.  She  was  super- 
visor of  physical  education  in  the  Salt 
Lake  City  schools  for  one  year  and 
instructor  in  gymnastics  at  the  Des- 
eret  Gymnasium  one  year.  She  served 
as  play  leader  on  the  Ensign  Stake 
Primary  Board  for  five  years,  was  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Los  Angeles 
Stake    Primary    board    from    1925    to 


1933,  and  president  of  the  Hollywood 
Stake  Primary  board  two  years.  She 
was  also  a  member  of  the  Relief  So- 
ciety board  of  the  Hollywood  Stake 
and  is  now  instructor  of  Social  Ser- 
vice work  in  the  Relief  Society  of  Mar 
Vista  Ward,  California.  On  July  18, 
1912,  she  was  married  to  Edwin  J. 
Evans,  and  is  the  mother  of  four  chil- 
dren, namely,  Blaine  Bitner,  Marion, 
Edwin  J.,  jun.,  and  Douglass  Bitner. 

FELT,  Louie  Bouton,  first  general 
president  of  the  Primary  Association, 
was  born  May  5,  1850,  at  Norwalk, 
Conn.,  a  daughter  of  Joseph  Bouton 
and  Mary  Barts.  She  was  baptized 
in  1858  by  W.  J.  Dalton.  Her  father 
was  president  of  the  Norwalk  Branch 
and  with  his  family  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  1866.  In  response  to  a 
call  from  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  she 
went  to  the  "Muddy"  Mission  in  Ne- 
vada the  following-  year.  Sister  Louie 
was  educated  in  the  district  schools 
of  Norwalk  and  took  a  course  in  kin- 
dergarten work  with  Miss  Chapin  in 
Salt  Lake  City  in  1894-1895,  after 
which  she  taught  kindergarten  in  the 
11th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  She  acted 
as  secretary  of  the  11th  Ward  Sunday 
school,  and  on  Sept.  14,  1878,  she  was 
nominated  by  Eliza  R.  Snow  to  be 
president  of  the  11th  Ward  Primary 
Association.  Sister  Felt  functioned 
as  treasurer  and  stake  officer  of  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  from  1878  to  1882,  and 
was  also  a  member  of  a  dramatic  so- 
ciety. She  was  sustained  as  general 
president  of  the  Primary  Association 
June  19,  1880,  and  held  this  office  for 
47  yeai'S  continuously,  an  outstanding 
recoi-d  in  the  Church.  The  "Chil- 
dren's Friend,"  the  organ  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association,  was  commenced  in 
1902,  and  carried  on  successfully  un- 
der her  leadership.  The  hosjjital  fund 
was  established  in  1911  and  the  L.  D. 
S.  Children's  Hospital  commenced  in 
1922,  both  under  her  able  direction. 
She  was  honorably  released  as  general 
president  of  the   Primary   Association 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


283 


Oct.  G,  l'J25,  and  made  an  honorary 
member,  which  position  she  held  un- 
til her  death.  On  Dec.  29,  1866,  she 
was  married  to  Joseph  H.  Felt,  whom 
she  met  while  crossing  the  plains  with 
a  company  of  saints.  She  had  no  chil- 
dren of  her  own,  but  reared  Louie  and 
Vei'a  Felt,  children  of  her  husband's 
second  wife.  Sister  Felt  had  a  charm- 
ing, magnetic  personality  with  a  lov- 
able disposition.  She  drew  people  to 
her  and  held  them,  and  was  a  model 
wife  and  a  great  lover  of  little  chil- 
dren. She  died  Feb.  13,  1928.  (See 
"The  Children's  Friend,"  Vol.  13,  p. 
597;  Vol.  18,  p.  403,  Vol.  24,  p.  422; 
and  Vol.  27,  pp.  29,  99.) 

FELT,  Vera  Ingar,  recording  secre- 
tary of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  November, 
1903,  to  June  23,  1911,  was  born  Feb. 
22,  1881,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Joseph  H.  Felt  and  Eliza- 
beth Mineer.  She  was  baptized  in 
1889  by  her  father,  graduated  f)om 
the  Salt  Lake  High  School  and  was  a 
student  of  the  University  of  Utah.  She 
led  the  orchestra  in  the  11th  Ward, 
Ensign  Stake,  for  several  years.  She 
was  one  of  the  first  women  to  serve 
in  the  Surveyor  General's  office  and 
held  the  position  of  department  super- 
visor there  for  ten  years.  Sister  Felt 
died  Dec.  1,  1925.  (See  Deseret  News, 
March  3,  1925.) 

FOLLAND,  Grace  Freeze,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1904  to  1907, 
was  born  Sept.  18,  1879,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  James  Perry 
Freeze  and  Lelia  Tuckett.  She  was 
baptized  Oct.  4,  1887,  by  Joseph  II. 
Keddington,  was  educated  in  the  pri- 
mary and  secondary  schools  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  at  the  University  of 
Utah.  She  was  active  in  the  lltii 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  served  for 
some  time  as  literary  leader  in  the 
Yale  Ward  Relief  Society.  She  was 
president  of  Sigmas  of  Sigma  Chi, 
president    of    the     Pi     Kappa    Ajjilia 


Mothers'  club,  president  of  the  Au- 
thors' club,  secretary  and  treasurer 
of  the  Classics  club,  chairman  of  the 
civic  committee  of  the  Salt  Lake  Coun- 
cil of  Women,  and  chairman  and  mem- 
ber of  Women's  Republican  club.  On 
Nov.  6,  1903,  she  was  married  to  Wil- 
ilam  H.  Folland  and  became  the  moth- 
er of  three  sons,  namely,  Harold 
Freeze,  Donald  Freeze,  and  Edward 
Freeze  Folland. 

FOLSOM,  Maurine  Bennion,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1926  to  1928, 
was  born  Oct.  18,  1900,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Milton 
Bennion  and  Cora  Lindsay.  She  was 
baptized  Oct.  31,  1908,  by  John  H. 
Vaughn,  attended  the  public  schools 
and  received  a  B.A.  degree  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah.  She  specialized  in 
physical  education  and  music  and 
studied  in  New  York  City  for  one  year. 
She  was  a  teacher  in  the  Payson  High 
School,  recreation  leader  in  the  For- 
est Dale  Ward  and  in  the  Salt  Lake 
City  Recreation  Department.  For  sev- 
en years  she  resided  in  South  Ameri- 
ca, where  her  husband  was  engaged 
in  business.  She  organized  a  Primary 
Association  for  the  benefit  of  non- 
members  of  the  Church  and  her  own 
children,  and  engaged  in  other  com- 
munity service.  On  Feb.  1,  1928,  she 
was  married  to  Elry  Leonard  Folsom 
and  became  the  mother  of  three  chil- 
dren, namely,  Barbara  Bennion,  Rob- 
ert Elry  and  Jean  Lynn. 

FREEZE,  Lillie  (Lelia)  Tuckett,  an 

active  member  of  the  general  board  of 
the  Primary  Association  for  twenty- 
five  years  and  an  honorary  member 
since  1905,  was  born  March  26,  1855, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Henry  Tuckett  and  Marcel  E.  West- 
wood.  She  was  baptized  June  3,  1863, 
attended  the  district  schools  and  John 
Morgan's  Business  College  in  Salt 
Lake  City  and  has  always  been  a  great 
reader.  She  was  a  teacher  in  the  Re- 
lief  Society   of    the    11th    Ward,    Salt 


284 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Lake  City,  in  1870,  taught  in  the  Sun- 
day school  there  in  1868,  and  for  many 
years  afterwards  she  was  a  counse- 
lor in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  from  1871 
to  1881,  and  edited  the  11th  Ward 
"Star",  a  manuscript  journal.  She  was 
a  charter  member  and  first  secretary 
of  the  general  board  of  Primary  in 
June,  1880,  serving  until  October, 
1885,  was  sustained  as  first  counselor 
to  Pi*es.  Louie  B.  Felt  in  October, 
1888,  and  served  in  that  position  until 
December,  1905,  when  she  was  sus- 
tained an  honorary  member  of  the 
board.  She  also  traveled  throughout 
the  Church  as  a  member  of  the  gen- 
eral board  of  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.,  from 
1889  to  1906.  Being  in  California  in 
1916,  Sister  Freeze  was  one  of  the 
women  war  workers  in  the  California 
Mission.  She  was  also  a  counselor  in 
the  first  Relief  Society  in  the  Ocean 
Park  Branch  and  served  on  the  Cali- 
fornia Mission  Women's  Board  for  five 
years,  traveling  extensively  in  this  con- 
nection. On  the  50th  anniversary  of  the 
organization  of  the  Church  she  was 
one  of  the  speakers  on  the  program  in 
the  Tabernacle  in  Salt  Lake  City.  She 
also  prepared  an  aiticle  on  M.  I.  A. 
work,  which  was  used  at  the  World's 
Fair  in  Chicago  in  1893.  Sister  Freeze 
has  been  a  writer  for  the  "Deseret 
News,"  the  "Children's  Friend,"  the 
"Woman's  Exponent,"  the  "Improve- 
ment Era,"  the  "Young  Woman's 
Journal,"  the  "Liahona,"  etc.  When 
only  six  years  of  age  she  walked  from 
Salt  Lake  City  to  St.  George,  as  part 
of  a  caravan,  and  a  year  later  walked 
back  to  Salt  Lake  City.  During  rests 
on  the  trip  she  knitted  a  pair  of  hose. 
On  June  1,  1875,  she  was  married  to 
James  Perry  Freeze  and  became  the 
mother  of  two  sons  and  two  daughters, 
namely,  Harry  Tuckett,  Carl  Tuckett, 
Grace  Tuckett  and  Rhea  Tuckett 
Freeze. 

HARDY,  Adelaide  Underwood  El- 
dredge,  a  member  of  the  general  board 
of  the  Primary  Association  since  1927, 
was  born  July  11,  1877,  in  Salt  Lake 


City,  a  daughter  of  Joshua  Eldredgc 
and  Lizzie  Winder.  She  was  baptized 
July  11,  1885,  by  Joseph  Kimball  and 
attended  the  University  of  Deseret  in 
1899-1901.  She  worked  in  the  county 
assessor's  office  under  Ben  R.  El- 
dredge  and  W.  O.  Corless  and  later 
in  the  off"ice  of  T.  A.  Williams.  Her 
first  Church  position  was  that  of  sec- 
retary of  Primary  Association  in 
Meadowville,  Utah,  when  only  eight 
years  old.  As  a  member  of  the  12th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  she  served  as 
counselor  to  Annie  K.  Hardy  in  the 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  and  teacher  in  Sunday 
School  and  Primary  Association.  Be- 
fore her  marriage,  Sister  Addie  was 
a  member  of  the  old  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board,  and  later  became 
a  member  of  the  Ensign  Stake  Pri- 
mary board.  On  April  2,  1903,  she 
was  married  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple 
to  Rufus  Kay  Hardy  and  with  him 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  from 
1907  to  1909,  Bro.  Hardy  presiding 
over  that  mission.  Sister  Hardy  is 
the  mother  of  one  daughter,  Kay,  re- 
cently married. 

HARDY,  Annie  K.,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation from  1896  to  1899.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  186.) 

HORSLEY,    Ivy    Allen    Lamoreaux, 

oi'ganist  for  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1911  to 
1917,  was  born  April  29,  1890,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Edwin  J.  Allen  and  Sarah  D.  Varney. 
She  was  baptized  in  1898,  and  was 
educated  in  the  grade  schools  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  in  the  L.  D.  S.  Busi- 
ness College.  She  specialized  in  mu- 
sic and  became  a  music  teacher.  She 
served  as  organist  in  the  Waterloo 
Ward  of  the  Granite  Stake  for  four- 
teen continuous  years,  was  organist 
for  the  M.  I.  A.  board  of  the  Granite 
Stake  for  two  years  and  organist  in 
the  Whittier  Ward  of  the  Granite 
Stake.  On  Sept.  7,  1921,  she  was  mar- 
ried to  Henry  Howard  Lamoreaux  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


285 


became  the  mother  of  one  son,  David 
H.  Lamoreaux.  The  mannage  not  be- 
ing a  happy  one,  she  and  her  husband 
separated,  and  on  Sept.  15,  1932,  she 
was  married  to  Thomas  Leroy  Horsley 
in  the  Mesa  Temple.  The  family  home 
is  at  Mesa,  where  Sister  Horsley  is 
organist  of  the  3rd  Ward. 

HOWARTH,  Alice,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation from  1906  to  1917,  was  born 
June  5,  1871,  at  Nephi,  Utah,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Benjamin  Nephi  Howarth  and 
Betsy  Cook.  She  was  a  literary  lead- 
er and  guided  hundreds  of  young  peo- 
ple in  the  selection  of  good  books  from 
experience  gained  during  thii*ty-five 
years  of  service  with  such  firms  as 
George  Q.  Cannon  Book  Co.,  Walter 
Lewis  Co.,  and  the  Deseret  Book  Store. 
Sister  Howarth  died  May  26,  1936. 

HYDE,  Sarah  E.,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation from  1892  to  1901,  was  born 
June  18,  1862,  at  Moroni,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Rasmus  Justesen  and 
Sarah  Ann  Shepherd.  She  was  bap- 
tized in  1872  by  Samuel  Bunnel.  She 
became  the  wife  of  Charles  Albert 
Hyde  and  resided  at  Spring  City,  San- 
pete Co.,  Utah,  where  her  three  chil- 
dren were  born,  namely,  Grace  Mabel, 
Maud  and  Barney  Hugh. 

IVORY,  Berniece  Anderson,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  since  November, 
1932,  was  born  June  5,  1898,  in  Lehi, 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  B.  J.  Anderson 
and  Rachel  Woodhouse.  She  was  bap- 
tized June  30,  1906,  by  John  Morton, 
received  a  good  education  and  has 
been  engaged  in  Church  work  since 
1911.  When  13  years  of  age,  she  be- 
came a  Sunday  school  teacher  at  Lehi. 
In  1913,  she  was  play  leader  in  the 
Primary  Association  at  Lehi,  and, 
continuing  her  activities  as  a  recre- 
ation leader,  she  served  in  the  Pri- 
mary Association  at  Brigham  City  in 
1917-1918,  at  Moroni  in  1918-1922,  in 


Morgan,  Utah,  as  a  member  of  the 
Stake  Primary  Board  in  1923-1924, 
and  in  Salt  Lake  City  from  1925  to 
1932.  She  also  served  as  a  member 
of  the  Liberty  Stake  Primary  Asso- 
ciation from  1920  to  1930,  or  until  she 
was  called  to  serve  on  the  general 
board  of  Primary  Association.  Sister 
Ivory  is  an  expert  stenographer  and 
also  a  talented  musician  and  has  been 
particularly  active  in  leading  choirs, 
quartets,  choruses,  etc.  She  is  the 
wife  of  Orval  Reuben  Ivory  of  Salt 
Lake  City  and  is  the  mother  of  two 
daughters,  Lucille  and  Frances  Jeanne. 

JACK,  Mary  Ruthera,  secretary  and 
treasurer  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association,  was  born  Feb. 
11,  1896,  at  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  William  Thomas  Jack  and 
Jubeltine  Iversen.  She  was  baptized 
April  16,  1904,  at  Oakley,  Idaho,  by 
David  P.  Thomas,  and  early  taught 
lessons  of  faith  and  devotion  to  the 
Church  and  its  principles.  Her  pa- 
ternal grandparents  walked  across  the 
plains  with  a  handcart  company  in 
1857,  her  grandfather  having  been 
converted  to  the  gospel  while  serving 
with  the  British  army  at  Gibraltar; 
he  was  baptized  later  in  the  English 
Channel.  Her  maternal  grandparents 
joined  the  Church  in  Denmark,  where 
her  grandfather  suffered  imprison- 
ment for  preaching  the  gospel.  After 
arriving  in  America  they  were  among 
the  early  settlers  in  Utah's  Dixie 
where  Sister  Jack's  mother  was  born 
at  Washington,  Washington  Co.  Sis- 
ter Jack  moved  with  her  parents  to 
southern  Idaho  when  she  was  a  small 
child,  her  father  having  been  called 
to  preside  over  the  Cassia  Stake  of 
Zion,  with  headquarters  at  Oakley. 
Sister  Jack  was  called  to  be  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  Jan.  9,  1920,  at  the  same 
time  being  appointed  secretary-treas- 
urer of  the  organization,  a  position 
which  she  still  holds. 

JEPPSON,  Wilma,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the   Primary   Asso- 


286 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


elation,  was  born  in  Logan,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Hans  Jacob  Jeppson  and 
Dorothy  Elizabeth  Riggs.  She  received 
a  B.S.  degree  at  the  Brigham  Young 
University  in  1926,  and  a  M.A.  degree 
at  Columbia  University  in  1930.  Fur- 
ther work  in  New  York  and  a  study 
tour  through  Eui'ope  have  been  un- 
dertaken by  her  in  preparation  for  a 
Ph.  D.  degree  in  physical  education, 
recreation  and  health.  She  has  been 
associate  professor  of  ])hysical  educa- 
tion at  the  Brigham  Young  Univer- 
sity, a  member  of  the  Phi  Delta  Pi 
(National  Physical  Education  Fra- 
ternity for  women),  was  vice  presi- 
dent of  the  southwest  district  of  the 
National  Physical  Education  Associ- 
ation in  1936  and  has  been  elected 
president  of  that  organization  for  the 
year  1937.  Sister  Jeppson  presided 
over  the  Y.  L.  M.  L  A.  in  the  New  York 
branch  in  1929-1930,  was  a  member 
of  the  Granite  Stake  Sunday  school 
board  for  five  years,  a  member  of  the 
Utah  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board  and 
has  been  active  in  Sunday  school,  Re- 
ligion Class  and  Primary  work. 

JOHNSON,  Edna  Evans,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  in  1917,  was  born  Sept. 
20,  1886,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  William  Evans  and  Lucy 
Ann  Oakey.  She  was  baptized  in 
1894,  received  the  degree  of  A.  B. 
from  the  University  of  Utah  in  1921, 
and  that  of  M.  A.  from  the  same  insti- 
tution in  1936.  She  studied  music  at 
the  McCune  School  of  Music  in  Salt 
Lake  City  four  years  and  took  musical 
training  in  Paris,  France,  for  two 
years  and  also  in  New  York  City,  and 
Chicago,  ni.  Sister  Johnson  served 
as  chorister  of  the  Primary  Associa- 
tion in  the  Liberty  Stake  for  ten 
years,  was  choir  director  in  the  Emi- 
gration Ward  Sunday  school,  chor- 
ister of  the  Liberty  Stake  Sunday 
school  board  and  of  the  M.  L  A.  of 
the  Yale  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City.  She 
has  also  been  a  member  of  the  board 


of  directors  of  the  Salt  Lake  Oratorio 
Society,  president  of  the  Utah  Feder- 
ation of  Music  Clubs  and  was  super- 
visor of  music  at  the  Wm.  M.  Stewart 
Training  School  for  ten  years.  She 
was  a  soloist  with  the  Salt  Lake 
Tabernacle  choir  on  the  tours  to  New 
York  and  Seattle  and  has  always  been 
a  generous  contributor  of  her  musical 
gifts  to  church  and  civic  organizations. 
On  Aug.  24,  1917,  she  became  the 
wife  of  P^rank  A.  Johnson  and  is  the 
mother  of  five  children,  namely,  Afton, 
Peggy,  Francis,  Jewel,  and  Janice 
Johnson.  At  present  she  is  chorister 
of  the  Yale  Ward  Sunday  school. 

JONES,  Margaret  Elizabeth  (Bes- 
sie), a  member  of  the  general  boaz-d 
of  the  Primary  Association  since  1929, 
was  born  Oct.  19,  1900,  at  Coalville, 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  Charles  Richins 
Jones  and  Ann  Faddis.  She  was  bap- 
tized in  October,  1908,  by  her  father, 
graduated  from  the  Coalville  High 
School  and  was  awarded  the  degree 
of  A.  B.  at  the  University  of  Utah 
in  1922.  She  was  a  member  of  the 
Beehive  Honor  Society  in  1922  and 
founder  of  the  Acorn  Society  in  1921, 
which  was  granted  Mortar  Board  later 
on.  She  was  a  member  of  the  Chi 
Delta  Phi  and  Chi  Omego  sororities, 
president  of  the  Alumni  Chi  Delta 
Phi,  vice-president  of  the  U.  of  U. 
Alumni  Association  two  and  a  half 
years,  president  of  the  Utah  Delphians 
in  1934-1935  and  is  now  a  member  of 
the  Fine  Arts  Society.  She  was  a 
teacher  in  the  Coalville  schools  two 
years,  in  the  Kaysville  High  school 
two  years,  in  the  L.  D.  S.  College  six 
years,  and  in  the  South  High  School, 
Salt  Lake  City,  five  years.  She  acted 
as  ward  organist  at  Coalville,  was 
organist  for  the  Summit  Stake  and  for 
the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board  of  the  Summit 
Stake,  and  moving  to  Salt  Lake  City 
was  a  counselor  in  the  Capitol  Hill 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  and  sustained  as  a 
member  of  the  general  board  of  Pri- 
mary,   Sept.    11,    1929. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


287 


KERR,  Marion  Adeline  Belnap,  his- 
torian of  the  general  board  of  the 
Px-imary  Association,  was  born  June 
4,  1886,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Hyrum  Belnap  and  Christiane  Ras- 
nuissen.      She  was    baptized   July   27, 


^^^^n^Hf^^            ^^^^^^^^^1 

^^^^■p^*^    *«^<.\  V^^^^H 

^B^  4^    ^IH 

^^H  '*  ^^      .^^^H 

^^^^A^  i^S*"      ^           ^^^^^H 

^Hil^'  ^H 

^^^^^^^^FW-t '    /^^^^^^^^^^^H 

^^^mt       '^^^^^^k 

^^^^B 1  ^^^^^^^^^Hh 

1894,  by  Gilbert  R.  Belnap.  She  re- 
ceived a  four-year  diploma  from  the 
Weber  Stake  Academy  in  1905,  a  five- 
year  Kindergarten-Normal  diploma 
from  the  University  of  Utah  in  1907, 
was  a  student  at  the  University  of 
Chicago  during  the  summers  of  1913 
and  1914,  was  a  student  in  Paris, 
France,  in  1911,  1912,  1920  and  1921, 
and  teacher  in  the  Ogden  City  public 
schools  for  five  years.  She  was  assist- 
ant secretary  of  the  Ogden  4th  Ward 
Primary  Association  in  1898-1900, 
teacher  in  1900-1906,  and  teacher  in 
Sunday  school  in  1900-1905.  She  was 
a  teacher  in  Religion  Class  and  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  in  Huntsville,  Utah,  in  1905- 
1906,  and,  moving  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
was  a  teacher  in  the  33rd  Ward  Pri- 
mary Association  and  Sunday  school 
in  1906-1907.  She  was  a  member  of 
the  Weber  Stake  Sunday  school  board 
in  1907-190S  and  at  the  division  of  the 


Weber  Stake  in  1908,  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Ogden  Stake  Sunday  school 
board,  serving  in  that  capacity  until 
1911,  during  which  time  she  was  a 
member  of  a  temporary  committee 
which  served  in  the  place  of  counselors 
to  Samuel  Dye,  Stake  Sunday  School 
superintendent.  She  was  also  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Ogden  Stake  Board  of  Edu- 
cation in  1910-1911.  On  June  7,  1911, 
she  was  married  to  Walter  Affleck 
Kerr,  professor  of  modern  languages 
at  the  University  of  Utah,  and,  going 
with  him  to  Switzerland,  spent  the 
summer  of  1911  as  a  teacher  in  the 
branch  Sunday  school  at  Lausanne. 
Sister  Kerr  worked  with  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Union  Board  kinder- 
garten and  primary  committees  from 
1908  to  1911,  in  1913  and  from  1929  to 
1935.  She  was  a  member  of  the  En- 
sign Stake  Sunday  School  Board  from 
1912  to  1914,  president  of  the  11th 
Ward  Primary  Association  in  1912- 
1914,  and  class  leader  in  the  33rd 
Ward  Relief  Society  (Salt  Lake  City) 
in  1921-1922.  On  April  24,  1914,  she 
was  sustained  as  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation. 

Sister  Kerr  was  president  of  the 
University  of  Utah  Women's  Club  in 
1918-1919,  directed  World  war  wom- 
en's activities  at  the  University  of 
Utah;  served  as  an  officer  in  the  State 
Federation  of  Women's  Clubs  in  1918- 
1920,  of  the  Salt  Lake  Council  of 
Women  in  1935-1936,  and  of  the  Wom- 
en's Legislative  Council  from  1934  to 
the  present  time.  She  has  also  been 
clippings  chairman  of  the  State  Cen- 
tral Council  of  the  Daughters  of  the 
Utah  Pioneers  since  1932  and  was 
vice-president  of  the  Epsilon  chapter, 
Chi  Delta  Phi,  a  national  literary  fra- 
ternity, in  1934-1935.  Sister  Kerr  has 
been  a  prolific  writer;  she  was  the 
author  of  the  Kindergarten  Depart- 
ment section  of  the  "Juvenile  Instruc- 
tor" in  1910-1911  and  1929-1933;  co- 
author of  "Life  Lessons  for  Little 
Ones"    (Sunday   School    Kindergarten 


288 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Plan  Book)  and  writer  of  Primary 
Sunday  school  lessons  in  1929-1930. 
She  was  lesson  writer  for  the  "Chil- 
dren's Friend,"  in  1916-1933,  and  au- 
thor of  the  Primary  Lesson  Bulletin 
for  Group  2,  from  1933  to  the  present 
time,  and  of  the  Primary  Hand  Book  in 
1930.  She  is  the  mother  of  two  sons 
and  two  daug-hters,  namely,  Knight 
Belnaj),  Walter  Belnap,  Adele  Marion 
and  Helene  Naomi. 

LAMBERT,  Edith  Elizabeth  Hun- 
ter, second  assistant  in  the  g-eneral 
superintendency  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation, was  boi-n  March  14,  1878,  in 


Salt  Lake  City,  a  daughter  of  James 
Hunter  and  Agnes  Leatham.  She 
was  educated  in  the  grade  schools  of 
Salt  Lake  City,  the  Salt  Lake  High 
School  and  the  University  of  Utah. 
She  taught  school  in  Davis  County 
four  years  and  in  Salt  Lake  City 
twelve  years.  She  held  office  in  the 
6th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City  from  the 
time  she  was  15  years  of  age,  and  in 
1902  became  a  member  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake  Sunday  school  board.  She 
was  president  of  the  Pioneer  Stake 
T>  ■     ovy     Association    from     1904     to 


1907,  when  she  went  on  a  mission  to 
the  Hawaiian  Islands,  spending  three 
years  there;  during  thirty  months  of 
this  time  she  taught  the  mission  school. 
She  became  a  member  of  the  general 
boai'd  of  the  Primary  Association  Oct. 
11,  1910,  and  on  April  27,  1916,  was 
married  to  James  N.  Lambert  and  left 
immediately  afteiwards  with  her  hus- 
band on  a  mission  to  New  Zealand, 
over  which  mission  he  had  been  called 
to  preside  and  where  he  and  his  family 
(consisting  of  a  daughter,  Phyllis 
James,  and  a  son,  Claude  Needham) 
remained  four  years,  or  until  1920.  On 
April  1,  1917,  at  Auckland,  New  Zea- 
land, a  son  (Paul  Hunter  Lambert) 
was  born  to  Brother  and  Sister  Lam- 
bert. Dui-ing  this  mission  Sister 
Lambert  visited  most  of  the  branches 
in  the  mission  in  the  interest  of  the 
Relief  Society  and  Primary  Associa- 
tion. Bro.  Lambert  died  Sept.  12, 
1927,  as  assistant  superintendent  of 
the  Dr.  Groves  L.  D.  S.  Hospital,  after 
which  Sister  Lambert  who  had  pre- 
viously served  as  matron  of  the  nurses 
in  that  institution,  continued  to  func- 
tion in  that  capacity  until  called  into 
the  general  presidency  of  the  Primary 
Association   in    1934. 

LARSON,  Ebba  Pihl,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  Primary  Asso- 
ciation since  1931,  was  born  March  5, 
1891,  in  Sweden,  a  daughter  of  Axel 
Pihl  and  Amanda  Jacobsen.  She  was 
baptized  in  1900.  After  coming  to 
Utah,  she  received  her  education  in 
the  University  of  Utah,  graduating 
from  the  normal  department  of  that 
institution  in  1908.  Her  home  was  in 
Cottonwood,  in  which  ward  she  served 
in  the  Sunday  school,  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  etc. 
She  was  a  member  of  the  Cottonwood 
Stake  Primary  Board  for  ten  years 
and  superintendent  of  that  organiza- 
tion for  three  years  previous  to  be- 
coming a  member  of  the  general  board 
of  the  Primary  Association.  She  is  the 
wife  of  Edwin  Larson  and  the  mother 
of  two  children.  Margaret  and  Doris. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


289 


LEISHMAN,   Phyllis   Liljenquist,  a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  since  1932,  was 
born  at  Hyrum,  Utah,  May  21,  1906,  u 
daughter  of  Wallace  Hyrum  Liljen- 
quist and  Melinda  Petersen.  She  was 
baptized  May  21,  1914,  by  Bishop 
Loran  D.  McBride,  attended  the  South 
Cache  High  School,  the  South  Cache 
Seminary  at  Hyrum  and  the  Utah 
State  Agricultural  College  at  Logan. 
In  the  Hyrum  1st  Ward  she  was  an 
active  oificer,  and  a  member  of  the 
Stake  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.  board,  and,  com- 
ing to  Salt  Lake  City,  was  organist 
of  the  Relief  Society  of  the  20th  Ward. 
She  filled  a  mission  in  the  Northwest- 
ern States  from  1928  to  1930,  during 
which  she  was  mission  superintendent 
of  Primary  and  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.  and 
supervisor  of  the  lady  missionaries. 
On  Sept.  3,  1931,  she  was  married  to 
Robert  Bradshaw  Leishman  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple  and  is  the  mother 
of  two  children,  namely,  Robert  Lynn 
and  Nina. 

LLOYD,     Leah    Fidkin     Ashton,     a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  Pri- 
mary Association,  was  born  June  19, 
1894,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  George  S.  Ashton  and 
Leah  R.  Fidkin.  She  commenced  her 
Church  activities  when  quite  young, 
teaching  in  Sunday  school  and  Pri- 
mary and  being  organist  and  music 
director,  when  required.  Later  she  be- 
came president  of  the  ward  Primary 
Association  and  still  later  a  member  of 
the  Stake  Primary  board.  She  also 
acted  as  organist  for  the  Stake  Relief 
Society  board  and  was  specially  called 
to  be  organist  of  the  14th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  Stake.  She  became  the 
wife  of  George  C.  Lloyd  and  resided  in 
the  10th  Ward  (Liberty  Stake),  where 
she  worked  in  the  Sunday  School  and 
M.  I.  A.  Then  the  family  moved  to 
Hawthorn  Ward  (Granite  Stake), 
where  Sister  Lloyd  served  as  ward 
organist  and  was  called  to  the  Stake 
Primary  board.  For  two  years  she 
taught  music   to   the   childi-en  of  the 


Primary  Hospital,  an  experience  which 
she  terms  "delightful".  While  her 
husband  filled  a  six  months  mission 
she  lived  in  the  Capitol  Hill  Ward, 
where  she  was  called  to  serve  on  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board 
and  finally  appointed  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  Primary  Association, 
Nov.  27,  1935.  As  a  preparation  for 
her  usefulness  she  attended  the  L.  D. 
S.  College,  the  Univex-sity  of  Utah, 
and  studied  advanced  music  under 
Prof.  Spencer  Clawson  and  Prof. 
Henry  Giles. 

MAESER,  Lillian  Loveland,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1904  to  1906, 
was  born  Sept.  1,  1871,  at  Brigham 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Chester  Car- 
los Loveland  and  Mary  Ann  Barnes. 
She  was  a  student  of  the  Brigham 
Young  University,  and  taught  kinder- 
gai'ten  and  grades  in  several  towns  of 
Utah.  On  March  29,  1894,  she  was 
married  to  Emil  Maeser  and  accom- 
panied him  on  a  mission  to  Germany. 
She  became  the  mother  of  four  chil- 
dren, namely,  Karl,  (born  and  died  in 
Germany),   Paul,   Earl  and   La   Prele. 

MELLOR,  Effie  Howe,  organist  for 
the  general  board  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation in  1910,  was  born  Sept.  3, 
1884,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daugh- 
ter of  George  Edward  Howe  and  Sarah 
Augusta  Barney.  She  was  baptized 
Sept.  3,  1892,  graduated  from  the 
Brigham  Young  University  School  of 
Music  in  1903  and  studied  pipe  organ 
in  1934-1936.  She  was  a  teacher  of 
music  in  the  B.  Y.  U.  in  1903-1906, 
and  has  been  a  teacher  of  piano  since 
1910.  Sister  Mellor  served  as  a  teach- 
er in  the  Primary  Association  of  the 
33rd  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  in  1909- 
1910,  president  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation in  the  Lincoln  Ward,  Idaho 
Falls  Stake,  in  1910-1914,  president 
of  the  Idaho  Falls  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
board  in  1914-1922,  music  diiector  in 
the  same  organization  from  1923  to 
1935  and  has  been  organist  of  North 


Vol.   IV.   No.    19 


May  9,   1936 


290 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Idaho  Falls  Stake  Relief  Society  board 
since  1935.  On  Sept.  5,  1906,  she  was 
married  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  to 
John  Oliver  Mellor  (M.D.)  and  is  the 
mother  of  two  sons,  namely,  Wendell 
John  and  Joel  Kimball  Mellor. 

MERRILL,  Amy  Lyman,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  1910  to  1913,  was 
born  Dec.  10,  1882,  in  Tooele,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Francis  M.  Lyman  and 
Clara  Callister.  She  lived  at  Tooele 
from  1882  to  1889,  at  Manassa,  Colo., 
from  1889  to  1892  and  at  Salt  Lake 
City  from  1892  to  1912.  She  graduated 
from  the  Salt  Lake  City  schools  in 
1902,  from  the  high  school  at  Ithaca, 
N.  Y.,  in  1903,  and  from  the  University 
of  Utah  normal  course  in  1904,  took 
a  special  diploma  in  Domestic  Science 
at  Columbia  University  in  1909  and  the 
degree  of  B.  S.  at  the  Utah  Agricul- 
tural College  in  1913.  After  teach- 
ing in  Grantsville  and  Salt  Lake  City, 
Sister  Merrill  taught  domestic  science 
at  the  L.  D.  S.  High  School  in  1909- 
1912  and  was  the  first  home  demon- 
strator for  Utah  and  the  Mid-West  in 
1913-1914.  She  was  superintendent 
of  Practice  House  at  the  Utah  Agri- 
cultural College  in  1919-1922  and  Dean 
of  Women  at  the  Brigham  Young  Uni- 
versity in  1922-1924.  She  also  served 
as  an  officer  in  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the 
20th  Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  president 
of  Primary  Association  in  Pocatello, 
Idaho  and  president  of  Relief  Society 
at  Washington,  D.  C.  On  Sept.  9,  1914, 
she  was  married  to  Melvin  C.  Merrill. 
One  little  daughter  (Betty  Jane  Mer- 
rill) has  been  adopted  by  Brother  and 
Sister  Merrill.  The  family  now  re- 
sides at  Takoma  Park,  Washington, 
D.  C. 

MILES,  Zaidie  Walker,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  1895  to  1900,  was 
born  Sept.  4,  1863,  at  St.  George,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Charles  Lowell  Walker 
and  Abigail  Middlemeiss.  She  was 
baptized  when   eight  years  of  age  in 


the  Vii'gin  River,  and  attended  the 
schools  of  St.  George.  She  attended 
the  Deseret  University  from  1892  to 
1894,  and  taught  school  from  1885  to 
1900.  She  presided  over  the  Primary 
Associations  in  the  southern  section  of 
Utah  for  the  general  Primary  Board 
from  1895  to  1900,  and  is  still  giving 
lessons  in  Relief  Society,  Primary  As- 
sociation and  Sunday  School.  She 
began  teaching  in  Church  organiza- 
tions in  1878,  was  a  Sunday  school 
teacher  in  1879,  counselor  in  Y.  M. 
M.  I.  A.  in  1880,  president  of  Primary 
m  1897  and  president  of  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  in  1899.  She  acted  as  secretary 
of  the  St.  George  Relief  Society  from 
1910  to  1920,  and  is  still  class  leader. 
She  was  president  of  the  Daughters 
of  Utah  Pioneers  in  1921  and  since 
1917  has  been  an  ordinance  worker  in 
the  St.  George  Temple.  In  1900  she 
was  married  to  Arthur  Fredrich  Miles 
and  became  the  mother  of  two  daugh- 
ters, Katherine  and  Florence.  She  has 
also  reared  seven  other  children  be- 
sides  her  own. 

MILNE,  Annie  Spencer,  a  membei" 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  1913  to  1917,  was 
born  May  21,  1876,  at  Smithfield,  Mich- 
igan, a  daughter  of  Thomas  Spencer 
and  Sarah  Ann  Tomalin.  She  was 
baptized  May  31,  1892,  by  John  Ked- 
dington.  In  1894-1896  she  took  spec- 
ial work  at  the  University  of  Utah, 
and  in  1896  graduated  from  Maud  May 
Babcock's  School  of  Elocution.  She 
was  a  student  of  the  Hemenway  Gym- 
nasium at  the  Harvard  University  dur- 
ing the  summer  of  1897  and  was  a 
summer  student  at  the  Chautauqua 
at  the  Columbia  University,  N.  Y.,  in 
1898-1900.  She  was  also  a  student 
under  Bertha  Kunz  Baker,  Alfred 
Ayers  and  S.  H.  Clark  in  New  York 
City  in  1900.  Sister  Milne  was  in- 
structor of  physical  education,  read- 
ing and  art  at  the  Branch  Normal 
School  in  1898-1905.  She  served  as  a 
counselor  in  the  Los  Angeles  Stake 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  Boaid  in  1927-1932,  and 
instructor  in   the   literary  (iei)artment 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


291 


of  that  organization  in  1933-1935.  She 
now  has  charge  of  the  social  service 
work  of  the  Whittier  Branch,  Cali- 
fornia, where  she  resides,  her  husband 
being  superintendent  of  the  State 
School  for  boys  there.  On  June  14, 
1905,  she  was  married  to  Erastus  Jar- 
vis  Milne  and  is  the  mother  of  three 
children,  namely,  Maud  May  Milne 
(deceased  July  1,  1933),  Erastus  Jay 
and  David  Spencer  Milne. 

MORRIS,  Emma  Ramsey,  a  mem- 
ber and  chorister  of  the  general 
board  of  the  Primary  Association  for 
several  years,  is  a  daughter  of  George 
W.  Ramsey  and  Amanda  Ross.  She 
was  a  student  at  the  University  of 
Utah,  studied  piano  with  Mattic  R. 
Stark,  organ  with  John  J.  McClellan, 
and  voice  culture  with  Anthony  C. 
Lund,  Madame  Klara  Klotte,  an:l 
Blanche  Corelli  (of  Berlin,  Gei- 
many).  She  made  her  debut  at  the 
Berlin  Philharmonic  Hall  with  the 
Berliner  Ton-Kunstler  Orchestra  un- 
der the  direction  of  Richard  Strausse, 
sang  at  the  New  Royal  Opera 
(Krolls),  the  Raphsoden  Theatre  and 
the  Alden  Theatre  in  Berlin.  She 
also  sang  with  artists  from  the  Ber- 
lin Royal  Opera  for  royalty  and  for- 
eign diplomats  many  times.  During 
her  second  trip  to  Europe  she  stud- 
ied several  years  in  Paris,  France, 
with  Joseph  Archainland.  Sister 
Morris  made  her  debut  at  the  Aeol- 
ian Hall  in  Paris  in  company  with 
leading  singers  from  the  Paris  Grand 
Opera  and  the  Opera  Comique.  Upon 
her  return  to  America  she  made  ex- 
tensive concert  tours  from  the  Atlan- 
tic to  the  Pacific,  singing  in  21  con- 
certs a  month.  She  sang  the  "Flag- 
Without  a  Stain"  for  Theodore  Roose- 
velt who  named  her  "Utah's  Night- 
ingale.'' She  sang  the  same  song  for 
President  Wm.  H.  Taft.  The  Grand 
Army  of  the  Republic  presented  her 
with  a  gold  and  pearl  flag  in  token 
of  her  services.  Her  singing  was 
commended  by  Madame  Schumann- 
Heinck.     On  her  third  trip  to  Europe, 


Sister  Morris  maintained  a  teaching 
studio  in  Paris  for  16  months.  She 
was  a  member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Opera 
Company  with  which  she  appeared 
on  several  occasions  in  leading  roles. 
She  also  sang  for  charity  concerts 
many  times  and  was  active  in  Sun- 
day School,  M.  I.  A.  and  Primary 
work.  She  was  set  apai-t  as  a  mis- 
sionary to  Germany,  giving  freely  of 
time  and  talents  in  several  missions 
in  Europe.  On  June  30,  1905,  she 
was  married  to  George  Q.  Morris  and 
is  the  mother  of  thi-ee  daughters, 
namely,  Marian,  Margery  and  Helen. 

NEBEKER,  Ann,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation since  1910,  was   born  at  Pay- 


son,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Ammon 
Nebekei-  and  Mary  Adeline  Dixon. 
She  was  baptized  June  4,  1885,  by 
Thomas  E.  Daniels,  graduated  from 
the  Payson  public  schools,  the  Nor- 
mal Department  of  the  University  of 
Utah,  and  the  New  York  School  of 
Medical  Gymnastics  and  Massage. 
She  has  visited  Europe  for  special 
activities  and  has  special  certificates 
in  physical  training  and  therapeutics. 
She  has   been  a   field  worker  for  the 


292 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


general  board  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation for  six  years,  has  been  a  so- 
cial welfare  worker  in  the  Family 
Welfare  Department  of  the  general 
board  of  Relief  Society  for  three  years 
and  since  June  1,  1934,  has  been  a 
field  worker  in  the  department  of  L. 
D.  S.  Social  Guidance.  She  has  la- 
bored in  ward  activities  and  as  a 
member  of  the  Liberty  Stake  Sunday 
school  board,  stake  president  of  Y. 
L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Nebo  Stake  from 
1901  to  1906,  represented  the  gener- 
al board  of  the  Primary  Association 
on  Church  Correlation  Committee, 
Social  Advisory  Committee,  Auxiliary 
Executive  Committee,  Board  of  Con- 
trol of  the  Deseret  Gymnasium  and 
the  Board  of  Trustees  of  the  Primary 
Children's  Hospital.  She  was  a  mem- 
bei'  of  a  sub-committee  for  the  pag- 
eant, "Message  of  the  Ages,"  and  is 
a  member  of  the  adjustment  commit- 
tee of  the  Neighborhood  Council  in 
Salt  Lake  City. 

PACE,    Julia    Ivins    Macdonald,    a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary    Association,    was   born    Dec. 


der  Dr.  Ellis  R.  Shipp  and  was  a  stu- 
dent at  Ann  Arboi',  but  unable  to 
finish  her  course  on  account  of  heart 
trouble.  She  practiced  obstetrics  in 
St.  George  and  was  active  in  Church 
work.  She  was  a  charter  member 
of  the  Union  Club  at  St.  George  and 
a  member  of  the  Utah  Women's  Press 
Club  in  Salt  Lake  City.  She  was  a 
writer  for  the  "Young  Woman's  Jour- 
nal" and  the  "Juvenile  Instructor", 
and  won  a  prize  for  a  poem  which 
Evan  Stephens  set  to  music.  On 
Dec.  12,  1880,  she  was  married  to 
Aaron  Macdonald  in  the  St.  George 
Temple.  One  son  (Aaron  Le  Claire) 
was  born  of  this  marriage.  Bro.  Mac- 
donald died  July  5,  1884,  and  in  1888 
Sister  Macdonald  was  married  to 
John  E.  Pace.  Three  children  were 
born  of  this  marriage,  namely,  Jessie 
Marguerite,  Julia  and  Karl  Israel. 
Sister  Pace  died  Jan.  17,  1900. 

P.ACK,   Sadie   Grant,   a    member   of 
the  general  board  of  the  Primary  As- 


2,  1S60,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  Israel  Ivins  and  Julia 
Hill.     She  took   medical   training   un- 


sociation  from  1918  to  1930,  was  born 
Dec.  20,   1877,   at   Bountiful,   Utah,  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


293 


daughter  of  Joseph  Hyium  Grant  and 
Evaletta  Eldredge.  She  was  baptized 
July  1,  1886,  by  Israel  Barlow,  sen., 
and  confirmed  the  same  day  by  Lew- 
is M.  Grant.  At  the  age  of  sixteen 
she  became  the  second  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  West  Bountiful 
Primary  Association,  and  was  presi- 
dent of  the  same  organization  in  1899- 
1903.  She  was  set  apart  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  Dec.  18,  1896,  as  a  mis- 
sionary to  the  Colorado  Mission,  was 
president  of  the  Relief  Society  in  New 
York  and  Brooklyn  in  1904-1906. 
president  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  33rd 
Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City  in  1909,  pres- 
ident of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  Liberty  Stake, 
in  1916-1918,  called  to  the  General 
Board  of  the  Primary  Association  in 
1918,  made  first  counselor  in  the  gen- 
eral presidency  of  Primary  Associa- 
tion Oct.  6,  1925,  and  released  Sept. 
11,  1929.  Sister  Pack  was  educated 
in  the  public  schools  of  Bountiful,  and 
at  the  University  of  Utah.  She  was 
married  to  Frederick  J.  Pack,  Nov. 
25,  1896,  and  is  the  mother  of  four 
children:  Eugene  G.,  Alvin  G.,  Mari- 
on, and  Eleanor.  (See  "Children's 
Friend,"  Vol.  25,  p.  23,  for  details.) 

PARKINSON,    Fannie    Woolley,    a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  about  two  years, 
was  born  Feb.  2,  1864,  at  the  family 
home  on  the  site  of  the  present  Bel- 
vedere Apartments  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  She  is  a  daughter  of  Edwin 
Dilworth  Woolley  and  Mary  Ann  01- 
pin,  and  was  baptized  July  2,  1874,  in 
City  Creek  by  her  father.  She  be- 
came active  in  ward  organizations, 
serving  as  a  counselor  in  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.,  teacher  in  Sunday  school,  etc.,  and 
succeeded  Augusta  W.  Grant  as  sec- 
retary of  the  13th  Ward  Relief  Soci- 
ety, Oct.  13,  1898.  When  the  Pri- 
mary Association  was  organized  in 
1889  in  the  13th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  Sister  Woolley  was  chosen  as 
president  and  held  that  position  until 
1901,  when  she  was  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Camila  Cobb  in  the 


Salt  Lake  Stake  Primary  Association. 
In  August,  1901,  she  received  a  call 
to  the  Colorado  Mission,  where  she 
went  in  October  of  that  year  with 
Lutie  Grant,  they  being  the  first  lady 
missionaries  in  that  field  of  labor.  Just 
before  her  release  she  received  a  let- 
ter from  Sister  May  Anderson  no- 
tifying her  of  her  appointment  as  a 
member  of  the  general  board  of  Pri- 
mary, so  she  visited  the  Juarez  Stake 
in  company  with  a  number  of  the 
general  authorities  of  the  Church, 
representing  the  Primary  Association 
as  she  returned  from  her  mission. 
Shortly  afterwards  she  was  married 
to  Pres.  George  C.  Parkinson  of  the 
Oneida  Stake  and  is  the  mother  of 
one  son  (Preston  Woolley  Parkinson). 

PEART,  Vilatc,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation from  1906  to  1909,  was  born 
in  1881.  She  was  a  very  beautiful 
woman  and  posed  as  the  Goddess  of 
Liberty  for  the  Pioneer  Jubilee  held 
July  24,  1897.  She  served  as  pi-esi- 
dent  of  the  Farmers'  Ward  Y.  L.  M. 

I.  A.,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Tabernacle  choir.  She  became  a 
member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  in  June,  1906, 
was  sustained  as  librarian  of  that  or- 
ganization April  1,  1909,  in  which  po- 
sition she  served  until  her  death  Oct. 

II,  1909.  (See  Deseret  News,  Oct.  12, 
1909,  for  article  and  photogi'aph.) 

PETTIT,  Mildred  Tanner,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association,  from  1931  to  1935, 
was  born  Aug.  9,  1895,  at  Payson. 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  Henry  S.  Tanner 
and  Laura  L.  Woodland.  She  was 
baptized  Sept.  15,  1913,  by  John 
Sundstrom,  graduated  from  the  L. 
D.  S.  High  School  and  was  a  student 
of  the  University  of  Utah  for  two 
years.  She  studied  music,  embracing 
piano,  pipe  organ,  harmony,  counter- 
point and  advanced  composition  for 
ten  years,  as  a  student  of  the  McCune 
School  of  Music,  the  University  of 
Utah,  and  for  one  year  at  the  Zackwei- 


294 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Hahn  Musical  Academy  at  Philadel- 
phia. She  has  received  recognition 
for  poetry,  stories,  music  and  articles 
in  the  "Children's  Friend,"  the  "Era" 
and  the  "Etude"  (a  national  music 
magazine).  She  was  a  member  of 
the  Ensig-n  Stake  Primary  Board  and 
is  at  present  a  member  of  the  Pasa- 
dena Stake  Primary  Association  in 
California.  On  April  20,  1921,  she 
was  married  to  Dr.  William  Alfred 
Pettit  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  and 
is  the  mother  of  four  sons  and  one 
daughter,  namely,  William  Alfred, 
jun.,  John  Tanner,  Edwin  Ray,  Thom- 
as  Henry  and  Dorothy  Ann   Pettit. 

PHELPS,    Laura    Lindon    Foster,   a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1910  to 
1919,  was  born  April  21,  1875,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Wil- 
liam H.  Foster  and  Eunice  Neslen. 
She  was  baptized  May  3,  1883,  by 
John  Cottam,  took  a  normal  school 
diploma  from  the  University  of  Utah, 
studied  in  Columbia  University  and  af- 
ter teaching  the  grades  in  Salt  Lake 
City  became  a  teacher  of  Domectic  Sci- 
ence at  the  East  Side  High  School 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  She  was  active  in 
Church  positions  and  was  first  coun- 
selor in  the  18th  Ward  Primary  As- 
sociation for  several   years.    On  July 

4,  1919,  she  was  married  to  Morris 
Calvin  Phelps  of  Mesa,  Arizona. 
While  residing-  there  Sister  Phelps 
was  a  member  of  the  Stake  Y.  L.  M. 
1.  A.  board.    She  died  at  Mesa,   Nov. 

5,  1928. 

RAILE,  Vilate  Schofield  Chambers, 

a  member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1913  to 
1932,  is  a  daughter  of  Nephi  Y.  Scho- 
field and  Vilate  Ellen  Romney.  She 
became  the  wife  of  George  Cham- 
bers, who,  after  she  had  borne  him 
two  children  (Frank  George  and  Rob- 
ert L.  Chambers),  was  accidentally 
killed.  Some  time  later  Sister  Cliam- 
bers  was  married  to  Dr.  Henry  Raile 
and  became  the  mother  of  a  daugh- 
ter (Ramona  Raile). 


RICHARDS,    Eleanor    R.    Jeremy. 

a  member  of  the  general  board  of 
the  Primary  Association  from  1913 
to  1919,  was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  Sept.  29,  1877,  a  daughter  of 
John  Jeremy  and  Sarah  Ann  Riley. 
She  was  baptized  Nov.  3,  1885,  by 
John  Cottam,  graduated  from  the 
Salt  Lake  High  School  and  attended 
the  University  of  Utah.  Later  she 
taught  in  the  Salt  Lake  City  and  Salt 
Lake  County  schools  for  twenty  years. 
For  some  time  she  was  president  of 
the  Primary  Association  in  the  15th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  was  later 
president  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Pri- 
mary Board.  She  served  as  a  mis- 
sionary on  the  Temple  Block  in  Salt 
Lake  City  for  thirteen  years,  and, 
moving  to  Idaho,  became  president 
of  the  Malad  Stake  Relief  Society 
board,  and  a  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Malad  Stake  P)'imary 
board.  She  visited  Great  Britain  in 
1909,  and  made  many  friends  for  the 
missionaries,  one  of  them  being  Tre- 
vor Wignall,  a  noted  English  news- 
paper man  and  writer  for  the  "Lon- 
don Daily  Express."  On  June  2G, 
1!>19,  she  became  the  wife  of  Wil- 
liam H.  Richards,  president  of  the 
Malad  Stake  of  Zion. 

RICHARDS,  Georgina  Spencer  Felt, 

a  member  of  the  general  board  of 
the  Primary  Association  from  1913  to 
1927,  was  born  Jan.  28,  1891,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Charles  B.  Felt  and  Georgina  Spen- 
cer. She  was  baptized  Feb.  2,  1899, 
by  Hyrum  Groesbeck  and  graduated 
from  the  Salt  Lake  City  public  schools 
and  the  L.  D.  S.  High  School.  She 
served  as  secretary,  teacher  and 
member  of  the  presidency  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  of  the  17th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  became  a  member 
of  the  Granite  Stake  Primary  board, 
was  pi-esident  of  the  Primary  Asso- 
ciation of  the  27th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  from  1933  to  1935  and  was  ac- 
tive in  other  auxiliary  organizations. 
On  Oct.  15,  1913,  she  was  married  to 
Joel  Richards  and   became   the   moth- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


295 


er  of  five  children,  namely,  Wayne 
Felt,  Melvin  Brent,  Joel,  jun.,  Charles 
Elliott  and  Helene  Maxine.  (See 
"Children's  Friend,"  Vol.  26,  p.  318.) 

RICHARDS,  Louisa  Lula  Greene,  a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1892  to 
1917,  was  born  April  8,  1849,  at  Kanes- 


ville,  PoiiawrtUaiiiif  County,  Iowa,  a 
daughter  of  Evan  M.  Greene  and  Su- 
san Kent.  She  was  baptized  in  April 
1857,  by  her  father  and  came  with 
her  parents  to  Utah  in  Allen  Weeks' 
company  in  1852.  She  was  taught  by 
her  father,  who  was  an  excellent 
teacher,  was  a  student  of  Tripp  and 
Rog:er's  High  School  in  Salt  Lake  City 
and  attended  the  University  of  Des- 
eret,  John  R.  Park,  principal.  In  1868 
she  became  the  first  secretary  of  the 
Relief  Society  in  Smithfield,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  sei'ving-  in  that  position  for 
some  time.  She  was  also  the  first  presi- 
dent of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  at  Smithfield, 
being"  sustained  in  that  position  May 
25,  1871.  She  was  also  a  teacher  in 
the  first  Sunday  school  in  the  Smith- 
field  Ward  and  assisted  in  organizing 
the  first  Piimary  Associations  in 
Cache  County,  being  a  teacher  in  the 
oitianization    at    Smithfield    and    also 


a  member  of  the  Home  Dramatic  Club 
there.     Coming  to  Salt  Lake  City,  she 
presided  over  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
20th   Ward   and   was   selected   as  the 
first  president  of  Primary  there,  but 
Sister  Eliza  R.  Snow  advised  that  she 
be  allowed  to  assist  her  in  organizing 
Primary  Associations  and  other  wom- 
en's    organizations     throughout     the 
Church.     Sister  Richards  was  the  first 
editor    of   the    "Woman's    Exponent," 
the  first  publication  owned  and  edited 
by  the  women  of  the  Church.  The  first 
number  of  this  periodical  was  issued 
June  1,  1872.     Sister  Richards  was  a 
member  of  committee  on  publications 
for  the  Deseret  Sunday  School  Union 
board  for  many  years,  and  was  editor 
of  the  "Little   Folks  Department"   of 
the    "Juvenile   Instructor."    Upon   the 
completion   of  the  Salt  Lake   Temple 
she  was  called  as  an  ordinance  worker, 
being'  set  apart  June  7,  1893,  and  re- 
leased March  2,  1934.    At  an  early  day 
she  was  called  to  be  a  visiting  repre- 
sentative   of  all    the    women's   organ- 
izations   of    the    Church,    and    in    this 
capacity  has  traveled  from  Canada  to 
Arizona,  encouraging  the  sisters  and 
helping-   the   good  work   along-.    Sister 
Richards  is  the  author  of  hundreds  of 
poems  and  stories  which  have  appear- 
ed in  the  "Woman's  Exponent,"  "Des- 
eret  News,"  the  "Improvement  Era," 
the  "Juvenile  Instructor,"  the  "Young- 
Woman's     Journal,"     the     "Children's 
Friend,"    the    "Relief    Society    Maga- 
zine,"   and    in   other   newspapers    and 
periodicals     published     in     the    inter- 
mountain  region.     She  assisted  Sister 
Aurelia   S.   Rogers  in  the   publication 
of  her  history  and  is  the  author  of  a 
book  of  poems  entitled  "Branches  That 
Run    Over    the    Wall."     On    June    16, 
1873,  she  was  married  to  Levi  Willard 
Richards   and    became   the    mother   of 
seven  children,  namely,  Mary  Greene, 
Mabel,    Lee    Greene,    Willard    Greene, 
Evan  Greene,  Heber  Greene  and  Sar- 
ah Greene. 

ROGERS,  .\urelia  Spencer,  founder 
of  the  Primary  Association  movement, 
was  born  Oct.  4,  1834,  at  Deep  Creek, 


296 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Conn.,  a  daughter  ol"  Oison  Spencer 
and  Catherine  Curtis.  She  was  bap- 
tized in  1840  and  came  to  Utah  in 
September,  1848,  in  Pre.s.  Brigham 
Young's    company,    when    her    father 


wa.s  on  a  mission  in  Englar.d  and  her 
mother  had  died  after  leaving  Nau- 
voo.  She  was  cared  for  by  other 
saints.  She  was  well  educated,  her 
father  being  the  first  chancellor  of 
the  University  of  Deseret.  She  be- 
came a  school  teacher,  was  an  expert 
seamstress  and  a  great  lover  of  chil- 
dren, indeed,  she  was  kindness  per- 
sonified. She  was  set  apart  Aug.  1, 
1878,  as  president  of  a  little  Primary 
Association  in  the  Farmington  Ward, 
in  Davis  County,  Utah,  and  sustained 
as  president  of  the  Primary  organiza- 
tions in  Davis  Stake,  July  IG,  18S0. 
Accompanying  Sister  Eliza  R.  Snow 
she  visited  the  stakes  of  the  Church 
and  became  a  member  of  the  general 
board  of  the  Primary  Association, 
Oct  9,  1893.  She  continued  to  serve 
in  this  capacity  until  her  death  which 
occurred  Aug.  19,  1922.  Sister  Rog- 
ers was  a  delegate  to  the  Woman's 
Suffrage  convention  at  Altanta,  Geor- 
gia, in  January,  1895,  and  also  a  dele- 
gate to  the  National  Council  of  Wom- 


en, at  the  second  triennial  congi-ess 
at  Washington,  D.  C,  in  February, 
1895.  At  this  convention  she  offered 
the  opening  prayer  and  was  on  the 
program.  In  1898,  Sister  Rogers  pub- 
lished the  story  of  her 
father's  life  and  her  own 
in  "Life  Sketches."  On 
March  27,  1851,  she  was 
married  to  Thomas  Rog- 
ers and  became  the  moth- 
er of  ten  children,  name- 
ly, Orson,  Andrew  Loyce, 
Ella,  Howard,  George, 
Clarence,  Lucy,  a  daugh- 
ter who  only  lived  five 
hours,  a  son  who  died  at 
three  months,  and  Wil- 
liam. At  Sister  Rogers' 
funeral  the  speakers 
w  ere  Pres.  Heber  J. 
Grant  and  Sister  Louie 
B.  Felt.  (See  Children's 
Friend,  Vol.  13,  p.  478; 
Vol.  18,  p.  278.) 

ROMNEY,  Emma  Phillips,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1906  to  1917, 
was  born  Feb.  10,  1862,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  William  G. 
Phillips  and  Maria  Tuckfield.  She  was 
baptized  in  1870  by  Mark  Lindsay  and 
educated  in  the  public  schools  and  the 
University  of  Deseret.  She  was  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Emma  Toone  when 
the  first  Primary  Association  in  the 
20th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  was  or- 
ganized. She  was  also  president  of 
the  Relief  Society  in  that  ward  fi'om 
1914  to  1925.  She  presided  over  the 
Relief  Societies  in  the  New  Zealand 
Mission  from  1911  to  1914,  while  her 
husband  presided  over  that  mission. 
On  Sept.  4,  1884,  she  was  married  to 
Orson  D.  Romney.  Three  sons  and 
two  daughters  were  born  to  them, 
namely,  Oi^son  D.,  jun.,  Melbourne. 
William  George,  Vilate  Ellen  and 
Gertrude. 

ROSS,  Isabelle  Salmon,  first  assist- 
ant in  the  general  superintendency  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


297 


the  Primary  Association,  is  a  daugh- 
ter of  William  Weir  Salmon  and  Mar- 
garet Hay  Hunter.  She  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  of  age  by  William 
Phillips,    and    I'eceived    her    education 


in  the  public  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City, 
later  specializing  in  physical  educa- 
tion. She  was  a  teacher  of  the  pri- 
mary grade  in  the  18th  Ward  Church 
school.  Salt  Lake  City.  She  also 
taught  in  the  Salt  Lake  City  public 
schools  and  was  director  of  physical 
education  at  the  Brigham  Young  Col- 
lege at  Logan,  Utah,  and  director  of 
physical  education  at  the  School  for 
the  Deaf  and  Blind  at  Ogden,  Utah, 
where  her  work  is  outstanding.  In 
pursuit  of  her  chosen  work  she  attend- 
ed the  University  of  Utah,  took  a 
summer  course  in  the  Hemingway 
Gymnasium  at  the  Harvard  Univer- 
sity and  a  course  in  speech  under 
Alfred  Ayers  in  New  York  City.  Wil- 
liam W.  Salmon  and  his  family  were 
prominent  members  of  the  20th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City  and  from  her  child- 
hood Sister  Ross  was  active  in  ward 
activities,  especially  in  the  Primary 
Association  and  Sunday  Schools.  On 
Sept.  29,  1897,  she  was  married  to 
Charles  James  Ross  of  Ogden  (a  mem- 
ber of  the  Deseret  Sunday  School 
board)   and  she  became  supervisor  of 


the  kindergarten  department  of  the 
Weber  Stake  Sunday  school  board.  She 
is  also  a  member  of  the  Weber  Board 
of  the  Daughters  of  the  Pioneers.  Sis- 
ter Ross  served  as  second  assistant 
in  the  general  superintendency  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1926  to 
1930,  when  she  was  promoted  to  the 
position  of  first  assistant  superinten- 
dent. 

SHURTLIFF.  Mary  Myrtle  Ballard, 

p.  member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1912  to 
1913,  was  born  Aug.  21,  1885,  at  Lo- 
gan, Utah,  a  daughter  of  Henry  Bal- 
lard and  Margaret  McNeil.  She  was 
baptized  Aug.  22,  1893,  by  W.  M. 
Checketts.  She  was  educated  at  the 
Brigham  Young  College  and  at  the 
Agricultural  College  at  Logan,  Utah, 
and  at  the  University  of  California 
at  Berkeley,  Calif.  She  was  head  of 
the  Domestic  Science  Department  of 
the  Weber  Stake  Academy  for  some 
time.  She  served  as  assistant  secre- 
tary of  the  Primary  Board  of  the 
Cache  Stake  in  1905-1908,  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Weber  Stake  Sunday  School 
Board  in  1908-1910,  and,  moving  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  was  president  of  the 
Liberty  Stake  Relief  Society  Board 
in  1921-1925.  She  is  historian  of  the 
Yalecrest  Camp  of  the  Daughters  of 
Utah  Pioneers.  On  Sept.  3,  1908,  she 
was  married  to  Daniel  Ray  Shurtliff. 
Four  children  have  blessed  this  mar- 
riage, namely,  Wendell  Ray,  Richard 
Ballard,  Virginia  and  Barbara. 

SMITH,  Cordia  Hendrikson,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  boai-d  of  the 
Primary  Association  since  1917,  was 
born  at  Levan,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Heni-y  Hendrikson  and  Cordia  Thom- 
asson.  She  was  baptized  Sept.  2,  1897, 
by  Martin  Nielson,  graduated  from 
the  L.  D.  S.  high  school  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  while  attending  that  insti- 
tution won  the  "Heber  J.  Grant  schol- 
arship" for  scholastic  ability.  She  ob- 
tained the  degree  of  A.B.  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  Utah  in  1912  and  taught 
school  four  years.     Sister  Smith  was 


298 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


a  teacher  in  Primary  at  an  early  age, 
president  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in  Levan 
and  Sandy  wards,  chorister  in  both 
these  wards  and  also  in  a  stake  capac- 
ity. She  sei'ved  as  a  member  of  the 
Jordan  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board,  as 
director  of  ward  dramatics,  and  was 
sustained  as  a  member  of  the  general 
board  of  the  Primary  Association, 
Feb.  19,  1917,  and  has  traveled  exten- 
sively throughout  the  stakes  of  the 
Church  in  the  interest  of  Primary 
work.  In  1914  she  was  married  to 
Alma  F.  Smith  and  is  the  mother  of 
three  children. 

SMITH,  Edna  Lambson,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  May,  1901,  to  March 
24,  1911,  was  born  March  2,  1851,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of 
Alfred  B.  Lambson  and  Melissa  Jane 
Bigler.  She  loved  to  read  and  kept 
herself  informed,  and  understood  the 
Gospel  as  few  women  did.  When  her 
husband  was  conversing  on  matters 
pertaining  to  the  Gospel  she  would 
leave  her  household  affairs  and  listen 
as  did  Mary  of  old.  From  1893  to 
1922  she  presided  over  the  women 
workers  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  On 
Jan.  1,  1871,  she  was  married  to  Apos- 
tle (later  President)  Joseph  F.  Smith 
and  became  the  mother  of  five  sons 
and  five  daughters,  namely,  Hyruni 
Mack,  Alvin  Fielding,  Alfred  Jason. 
Edna  Melissa,  Albert  Jesse,  Robeit, 
Emma,  Zina,  Ruth  and  Martha.  Sister 
Smith  died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Feb. 
28,    1926. 

SMITH,  Gertrude  Pearson,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  since  1929,  was  born 
Oct.  6,  1887,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 
She  was  baptized  Oct.  (5,  189-5,  became 
a  member  of  the  Liberty  Stake  Sun- 
day School  board,  was  a  member  of 
the  Wasatch  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A. 
board,  a  member  of  the  Granite  Stake 
Sunday  School  boaid,  and  a  chorister 
and  supervisor  of  the  Granite  Stake 
Religion  classes  from  1926  to  1929. 
She  received   a  normal  diploma  from 


the  University  of  Utah,  and  was  a 
teacher  in  the  Salt  Lake  City  schools 
for  five  years.  For  a  time  she  was 
supervisor  of  schools  in  Heber  City, 
Utah,  and  for  four  years  was  instruc- 
tor in  the  Lincoln  County  High  School 
at  Panaca,  Nevada.  Later  she  became 
a  teacher  of  the  Home  Economics  De- 
partment at  the  L.  D.  S.  College  in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  president  of  the 
Parent-Teachers'  Association  of  the 
Irving  Junior  High  School.  On  Aug. 
16,  1911,  she  was  married  to  James 
Richard  Smith  and  is  the  mother  of 
one  daughter  (Sarah  Gertrude  Smith). 

SMITH,   Ida   Elizabeth    Bowman,   a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1902  to 
1918,  was  born  April  19,  1872,  at  Og- 
den,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Andrew  G. 
Bowman  and  Elizabeth  Fife.  She  was 
baptized  in  June,  1880,  by  her  father 
and  educated  in  the  Salt  Lake  City 
district  and  high  schools.  On  Nov. 
15,  1895,  she  was  married  to  Hyrum 
M.  Smith,  a  son  of  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith.  She  acted  as  general  treas- 
urer of  the  Primary  board  in  1906, 
as  general  librarian  from  Jan.  26, 
1906,  to  April  1,  1909,  and  again  from 
March  18,  1910,  to  her  death,  which 
occurred  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Sept.  24, 
1918.  Sister  Smith  did  outstanding 
canteen  work  and  Red  Cross  supply 
work  during  the  World  war  in  behalf 
of  the  general  Primary  board.  With 
her  husband,  she  filled  a  mission  to 
Europe  in  1913-1916,  while  her  hus- 
band presided  over  the  European  Mis- 
sion and  scores  of  letters  are  on  file 
from  English  nobility  thanking  her 
for  neat  and  useful  supplies  for  the 
British  soldiers,  furnished  while  she 
was  presiding  over  the  L.  D.  S.  Relief 
Societies  in  the  British  Mission.  She 
was  the  mother  of  two  sons  and  two 
daughters,  namely,  Joseph  Fielding, 
Hyrum  Mack,  Geraldine  (Mrs.  Melvin 
R.  Ballard)  and  Margaret  Macksene. 
(See  "The  Children's  Friend,"  Vol. 
17,  pp.  414-416.) 

SMITH,  Josephine  G.,  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Primaiy  As- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


299 


sociation  from  1902  to  1905,  was  born 
Oct.  13,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Nicholas  Groesbeck  and 
Elizabeth  Thompson.  She  "was  bap- 
tized in  1865  by  Thomas  Carlyle.  She 
attended  Karl  G.  Maeser's  school,  John 
Morg'an's  Business  College,  and  other 
schools  and  studied  at  the  Deseret 
University  for  three  years.  In  187G- 
1877  she  was  secretary  of  the  Y.  L. 
M.  I.  A.  in  the  17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  secretary  of  the  Relief  So- 
ciety of  the  same  ward  during-  the 
presidency  of  Clarissa  S.  Williams.  In 
1883-1884  she  filled  a  mission  to  Eu- 
rope with  her  husband,  and  for  thirty- 
four  years  has  labored  as  an  ordinance 
worker  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  and 
part  of  that  time  has  served  as  a 
teacher  in  the  Relief  Society  of  the 
17th  Ward  and  as  a  member  of  the 
Daughters  of  Utah  Pioneers.  On 
April  4,  1877,  she  was  married  to  John 
Henry  Smith  and  became  the  mother 
of  the  following  children:  Sarah  A., 
Nicholas  G.,  Joseph  H.,  Elizabeth, 
Lucy  (dead),  Glenn  G.,  Arzella  and 
Josephine. 

SMITH,  Huth  Pingree,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  1929  to  1933,  was 
born  June  24,  1907,  at  Coalville,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Frank  Pingree  and 
Pauline  Taggart.  She  was  baptized 
June  27,  1915,  by  Earl  Calderwood, 
graduated  from  the  L.  D.  S.  High 
School  and  later  received  a  B.A.  de- 
gree at  the  University  of  Utah.  While 
at  the  L.  D.  S.  High  School  she  re- 
ceived the  Heber  J.  Grant  award  for 
scholarship.  She  was  organist  of  the 
Sunday  School  and  Primary  Associa- 
tion of  the  11th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
for  a  time,  organist  of  the  University 
Ward  from  1925  to  1930,  counselor  in 
the  Ensign  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  in 
1927-1929,  and  president  of  the  Uni- 
versity Ward  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  from  1933 
to  1936.  On  June  5,  1929,  she  was 
married  to  Joseph  Fielding  Smith  (son 
of  Hyrum  M.  Smith  and  Ida  Bowman) 
and  is  the  mother  of  three  children, 
namely,  Ruth,  Ida  and  Raoul.  At  pres- 


ent she  is  teacher  of  the  literary  de- 
partment of  the  branch  of  the  Church 
at  Madison,  Wisconsin,  where  her  hus- 
band is  studying  art. 

SMOOT,    Alice    Taylor    Sheets,    a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association  from  1920  to 
1930,  is  a  daughter  of  James  Taylor 
and  Martha  Hirst.  She  was  baptized 
in  July,  1890,  by  John  Quigiey,  came 
to  Utah,  crossing  the  Atlantic  on  the 
steamship  "Wisconsin"  with  her  wid- 
owed mother,  who  had  six  little  chil- 
dren. She  has  been  an  active  worker 
in  the  auxiliary  organizations  of  the 
Church.  On  Dec.  27,  1899,  she  was 
mail'ied  to  Edwin  F.  Sheets  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  two  children, 
namely,  Walter  Taylor  and  Alice  Tay- 
lor Sheets.  Her  husband  died  Jan.  8, 
1919,  as  Bishop  of  the  33rd  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City.  On  July  2,  1930,  Sister 
Sheets  was  married  to  Reed  Smoot,  a 
member  of  the  Quorum  of  the  Twelve. 
With  him  she  has  visited  a  number 
of  stakes  and  missions,  always  bear- 
ing a  faithful  testimony.  While  re- 
siding in  Washington,  D.  C,  Sister 
Smoot  assisted  in  organizing  a  Pri- 
mary Association  there  and  was  also 
an  officer  of  the  Relief  Society. 

SNOW,  Minnie  Loveland,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1904  to  1906, 
was  born  Dec.  26,  1866,  in  Brigham 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Chester  Car- 
los Loveland  and  Mary  Ann  Barnes. 
She  was  a  president  of  the  Boxelder 
Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.,  and  a  contributor 
to  the  "Young  Woman's  Journal."  On 
June  IS,  1884,  she  was  married  to  Al- 
phonso  Houtz  Snow  and  became  the 
mother  of  six  sons  and  one  daughter, 
namely,  Alphonso  Loveland,  Carl  L., 
Victor  Hugo,  Chester  Carlile,  George 
Lorenzo,  Harold  Lee  and  Gertrude 
Eleanor.  Sister  Snow  died  Dec.  12, 
1906. 

STEWART,    Ella    Maria    Nebeker, 

one  of  the  first  aids  to  the  genei'al 
board  of  the  Primary  Association  from 


300 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


1892  to  1899,  was  born  Oct.  7,  1867, 
at  Laie,  Oahu,  Hawaii,  a  daughter  of 
George  Nebeker  and  Maria  Louisa  Dil- 
worth.  She  was  baptized  Dec.  4,  1875, 
by  Joseph  Dean,  and  confirmed  by  Jo- 
seph F.  Smith.  She  graduated  from 
the  University  of  Utah,  took  training 
in  kindergarten  work  in  1887  with 
Mrs.  M.  E.  Jones,  was  a  teacher  in  the 
Primary  Department  of  the  school  in 
the  19th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  etc., 
for  four  years,  was  critic  teacher  at 
the  Wm.  M.  Stewart  Training  School 
of  the  University  of  Utah  three  years 
and  was  a  pioneer  in  training  school 
work.  She  acted  as  president  of  Pri- 
mary in  the  19th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City 
at  the  age  of  14  years,  was  president 
of  Primary  Association  in  the  22nd 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City  and  became  a 
member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association,  Oct.  7,  1892,  be- 
ing set  apart  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith 
as  one  of  the  first  aids  set  apart  for 
this  work.  She  was  also  an  earnest 
Temple  worker.  She  was  married  in 
1894  to  Judge  Samu'el  W.  Stewart. 
Sister  Stewart  also  held  the  position 
of  vice  regent  of  the  Daughters  of  the 
American  Revolution  from  1931  to 
1932,  was  president  of  the  Authors' 
Club  from  1926  to  1929,  a  charter 
member  of  the  Friendship  Circle  and 
is  still  (1936)  active  in  literary,  civic 
and  Church  affairs. 

STEWART,  Emily  Smith,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1920  to  1932, 
was  born  Nov.  19,  1895,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  George  Al- 
bert Smith  and  Lucy  Woodruff.  She 
was  baptized  Nov.  19,  1903,  by  her  fa- 
ther, received  her  education  in  the 
L.  D.  S.  College  and  the  University  of 
Utah,  and  became  a  graduate  nurse 
of  the  Groves  L.  D.  S.  Hospital.  She 
was  called  by  Pres.  Louie  B.  Felt,  rep- 
resenting Pres.  Heber  J.  Gi'ant,  in 
1921,  to  take  special  work  in  social 
service  and  to  study  child  welfai-e  at 
the  Denver  (Colorado)  School  of  So- 
cial Work  and  at  the  Teachers'  Col- 
lege  at   Greeley,   Colorado.     In    1923, 


she  worked  with  the  Board  of  Chil- 
dren's Guardians  in  Washington,  D.  ('. 
For  a  short  time  she  was  a  guest  stu- 
dent at  the  Hull  House,  in  Chicago, 
under  the  direction  of  Jane  Addams 
and  also  at  the  Toynbe  Hall,  London, 
England,  under  Warden  Catchpole. 
Sister  Stewart  was  a  volunteer  nurse 
at  Camp  Lewis,  Washington,  D.  C, 
during  the  World  war,  has  served  as 
a  teacher  in  Religion  Class  and  as 
counselor  and  later  president  of  the  Y. 
L.  M.  I.  A.  of  the  LeGrand  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City.  Sister  Stewart  has  a  merry 
disposition,  is  kind  and  especially 
thoughtful  of  others.  On  Feb.  1,  1918, 
she  was  married  to  Robert  Murray 
Stewart  and  is  the  mother  of  one  son 
and  two  daughters,  namely,  Robert 
Mun-ay,  jun.,  Shauna  Lucy  and  Mar- 
tha Re  Jeune  Stewart.  (See  the  "Chil- 
dren's Friend,"  Vol.  26,  p.  167.) 

STRINGHAM,  Lucy  Lorenda  Fer- 
rin,  a  member  of  the  general  hoard  of 
the  Primary  Association  from  1906 
to  1907,  and  an  ordinance  woi'ker  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple  since  1934,  was 
born  Aug.  26,  1868,  at  Eden,  Weber 
Co.,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Josiah  Marsh 
Ferrin  and  Martha  Ann  Bronson.  She 
attended  the  grade  schools  in  Eden, 
graduated  from  the  Weber  Stake 
Academy,  and  served  as  assistant  to 
the  principal  of  the  Eden  School.  She 
was  seci'etary  and  later  president  of 
the  first  Primary  Association  in  Eden, 
ward  organist  for  eight  years  and  an 
officer  in  the  Sunday  school  and  Y. 
L.  M.  I.  A.  Moving  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
she  acted  as  president  of  the  Primary 
Association  in  the  2nd  Ward  for  four 
years  and  as  a  member  of  the  Liberty 
Stake  Primary  board.  She  became  a 
member  of  the  general  board  of  Pri- 
mary June  27,  1906.  She  served  as 
president  of  the  Davis  Stake  Y.  L.  M. 
I.  A.  for  eight  years.  Sister  Ferrin 
was  married  to  William  Stringham  in 
the  Logan  Temple  May  3,  1893,  and 
became  the  mother  of  four  sons,  name- 
ly, Ferrin  William,  Ashby,  Charlton 
Josiah  and  Bronson  Ferrin. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


301 


SUMMERHAYS,  Florence,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1913  to  1918, 
is  a  daughter  of  Joseph  W.  Summer- 
hays  and  Mary  Parker.  She  received 
a  graduate  kindergarten  diploma  from 
the  University  of  Utah  in  1913,  and 
took  the  degree  of  B.A.  from  the  same 
institution  in  1918.  She  was  a  student 
in  voice  in  New  York  City  in  1922- 
1925,  attended  the  University  of  New 
York  during  the  summer  of  1925,  and 
was  a  student  in  voice  in  Los  Angeles 
in  1929-1931.  She  was  a  member  of 
the  faculty  of  the  University  of  Utah 
three  years.  Sister  Summerhays  has 
been  loyal  in  her  Church  activities, 
was  chorister  in  the  Forest  Dale  Sun- 
day School,  Salt  Lake  City,  for  ten 
years,  chorister  in  the  19th  Ward 
Sunday  School  for  two  years,  choris- 
ter in  the  Hollywood  Ward,  Califor- 
nia, two  years  and  chorister  of  the 
Forest  Dale  Ward,  one  year.  She  has 
been  actively  engaged  in  radio  pro- 
grams over  the  WNYC  of  New  York 
City  and  the  NBC  of  Los  Angeles, 
California.  She  was  soloist  one  year 
at  the  Madison  Avenue  Presbyterian 
Church  in  New  York  City,  soloist 
two  years  at  the  Christian  Church  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  has  been  soloist 
at  the  Unitarian  Church,  Salt  Lake 
(^ity,  for  the  past  three  years. 

TALMAGE,  Nelle  Allen,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  1916  to  1927,  was 
born  July  29,  1889,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  daughter  of  Orson  Allen  and 
Ellen  Elizabeth  Cardwell.  She  was 
baptized  July  2,  1898,  by  John  Car- 
tridge and  confirmed  by  her  father. 
She  was  a  graduate  of  the  Salt  Lake 
High  School  and  received  a  normal 
diploma  from  the  University  of  Utah 
in  1907.  She  taught  in  the  public 
schools  of  Salt  Lake  City  five  years 
and  was  active  as  a  teacher  in  Sun- 
day school,  Primary  and  Y.  L.  M.  I. 
A.  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  later  in  the 
Relief  Societies  of  the  Boston  and 
Chicago   branches.     While    acting   on 


the  general  board  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation she  served  as  lesson  writer 
from  April,  1920,  to  November,  1921, 
and  also  as  a  writer  of  programs  and 
dramatizations  for  the  board.  While 
her  husband  was  attending  the  North- 
western University  at  Chicago,  111., 
and  the  School  of  Mines  in  New  Mexi- 
co, Sister  Talmage  was  active  in  so- 
cial service  and  women's  club  welfare 
woi"k.  On  Nov.  13,  1912,  she  was  mar- 
ried to  Sterling  Booth  Talmage.  (See 
the  "Children's  Friend,"  Vol.  26, 
p.  218.) 

TAYLOR,  Frances  Kingsbury 
Thomassen,  member  and  secretary  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation from  1910  to  1918,  is  a 
daughter  of  Joseph  C,  Kingsbury  and 
Eliza  Partridge.  She  was  a  student 
of  the  University  of  Utah  and  of  the 
Columbia  University  of  New  York  and 
received  a  musical  education  in  piano, 
organ,  harmony  and  counterpoint. 
She  was  organist  of  the  18th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  for  some  time  and 
served  as  president  of  the  Primary 
Association  there  from  1902  to  1910. 
She  was  president  of  the  27th  War-d 
Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  from  1922  to  1928,  and 
has  been  a  member  of  the  Ensign 
Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board  since  1931. 
She  has  been  chairman  of  the  Educa- 
tional Committee  of  the  Salt  Lake 
Council  of  Women  since  1934,  was 
treasurer  of  the  Ladies  Literary  Club 
from  1932  to  1933,  and  is  the  author 
of  a  book  entitled,  "Kindergarten  and 
Primary  Songs,"  a  second  edition  of 
which  was  published  by  the  Deseret 
Sunday  School  Board  in  1935.  Sister 
Taylor  was  the  wife  of  Olaf  Thom- 
assen who  lost  his  life  in  an  automo- 
bile accident  in  1919.  Some  time  later 
she  was  married  to  Dr.  Alfred  H.  Tay- 
lor of  Salt  Lake  City. 

THOMAS,  Edna  Harker,  a  member 
of  the  general  board  of  the  Primary 
Association  from  1904  to  1933  and  2nd 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
organization  from  1929  to  1933,  was 
born  April   11,   1881,  at  Taylorsville, 


302 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


Utah,  a  daughter  of  Benjamin  E.  Hai- 
ker  and  Harriet  Bennion.  She  was 
baptized  in  May,  1889,  by  Llewellyn 
Mantle  and  has  been  an  active  member 
of   the   Church    from   childhood.      She 


attended  the  Brigham  Young-  Univer- 
sity, at  Pi'ovo,  Utah,  the  University 
01  Califoi-nia  at  Berkeley  and  the 
American  University  at  Washington, 
D.  C,  besides  attending  summer  school 
in  New  York  City  and  Harvard,  Mass. 
She  taught  in  the  public  schools  in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  spent  five  and  a 
half  years  in  Japan,  where  her  hus- 
band labored  as  a  missionary,  presid- 
ing over  the  Japanese  Mission  some 
of  the  time.  She  was  a  member  of  the 
old  Salt  Lake  Stake  Y.  L.  M.  L  A. 
board  and  was  released  from  the  gen- 
eral board  of  the  Primary  Association 
to  accompany  her  husband,  a  U.  S. 
Senator,  to  Washington,  D.  C.  She 
is  still  in  Washington,  where  she  is 
a  member  of  the  Senate  Ladies  Asso- 
ciation, of  the  Congressional  Club  and 
of  the  Ladies  Democratic  Club.  She 
has  traveled  extensively,  is  a  member 
of  the  "Around  the  World  Club"  and, 
while  traveling  with  her  husband,  is 
always   ready   to   encourage  members 


of  the  Church  and  to  uphold  the  faith. 
On  June  25,  1907  she  was  married  to 
Elbert  D.  Thomas  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  and  is  the  mother  of  three 
daughters,  namely  Chiyo,  Esther  and 
Edna  Lou. 

THOMAS,  Eleanor  Bromley,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1922  to  1934, 
was  born  Nov.  25,  1880,  at  Mansfield, 
Nottinghamshire,  England,  a  daughter 
of  John  Bromley  and  Harriet  Thomp- 
son. The  family  came  to  America  in 
1882,  and  Sister  Eleanor  was  baptized 
in  Chicago,  111.,  by  Sylvester  D.  Brad- 
ford, May  29,  1900.  She  graduated 
from  the  public  schools  and  the  high 
school  in  Chicago,  where  she  also  stud- 
ied music.  She  has  held  the  office  of 
chorister  in  some  organization  of  the 
Church  for  the  past  32  years.  In  Chi- 
cago she  was  secretary  of  the  Sunday 
school  and  a  member  of  the  presidency 
of  the  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  when  first  organ- 
ized in  the  Chicago  Branch  of  the 
Church.  Coming  West,  she  resided  for 
a  time  in  Preston,  Idaho,  where  she 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Oneida 
Stake  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  board,  and  later 
coming-  to  Salt  Lake  City,  she  served 
as  a  member  of  the  Ensign  Stake 
Primary  Association  and  was  assistant 
chorister  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primai-y  Association  from  1927  to 
1930.  She  is  the  author  of  a  number 
of  Seagull  songs  and  pageants,  and 
of  "Old  and  New  Testament  stories," 
published  in  the  "Children's  Friend," 
and  was  the  originator  of  the  Mi-kan- 
wee  group  in  the  Primary  Association. 
On  Feb.  20,  1904,  she  was  married  to 
Dr.  D.  Preston  Thomas  and  is  the 
mother  of  one  daughter,  Rhea  Thom- 
as. At  the  present  time  Sister  Thomas 
is  an  ordinance  worker  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple,  theological  teacher  in 
the  Granite  Stake  Relief  Society  board 
and  teacher  of  the  women's  class  in 
the  Nibley  Park  Sunday  school.  Salt 
Lake  City. 

WAHLQUIST,  Vera  Esther  Pexton, 

a  member  of  the  general  board  of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


303 


Primary  Association  since  1029,  was 
born  April  6,  1890,  at  Nephi,  Utah,  a 
daughter  of  William  Nathaniel  Pex- 
ton  and  Mary  Jane  Gardner.  She  was 
baptized  in  July,  1898,  by  John  Bel- 
liston,  and  was  active  in  ward  activi- 
ties from  her  early  youth.  She  was 
a  member  of  the  Cottonwood  Stake 
Primary  Board  from  1915  to  1926,  and 
president  of  the  Cottonwood  Stake  Re- 
lief Society  from  1926  to  1929.  She 
took  the  degree  of  B.S.  at  the  Univei- 
sity  of  Utah  in  1916,  and  that  of  M.S. 
in  1925.  She  was  elected  a  member 
of  the  Phi  Kappa  Phi,  a  national  scho- 
lastic society,  in  1925.  On  Jan.  11, 
1918,  she  was  married  to  John  Eph- 
raim  Wahlquist  and  is  the  mother  of 
one  daughter.  La  Ve  Wahlquist. 

WALLACE,  Anna  Marie  Neve,  as- 
sistant chorister  and  a  member  of 
the  general  board  of  the  Primary  As- 
sociation fiom  1904  to  1907,  was  born 
Jan.  14,  1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  daughter  of  Soren  Peter  Neve  and 
Bengta  Olson.  She  received  hei'  edu- 
cation in  the  Salt  Lake  City  public 
schools  and  the  University  of  Utah, 
and  served  as  a  teacher  in  Sunday 
School,  Primary,  Religion  Class  and 
Relief  Society,  being  president  of  the 
Relief  Society  in  the  21st  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  for  some  time.  On  June 
8,  1892,  she  was  married  to  George 
Hetherington  Wallace  in  the  Manti 
Temple. 

WEST,  Josephine  Richards,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1893  to  1933, 
and  second  counselor  to  Louie  B.  Felt, 
general  president  of  the  organization, 
from  1896  to  1905,  was  born  May  25, 
1853,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  daughter 
of  Franklin  D.  Richards  and  Jane  Sny- 
der. She  was  baptized  June  5,  1861, 
by  Andrew  Jackson.  In  1872,  when 
Eliza  R.  Snow  organized  the  Retrench- 
ment Society  in  Weber  County,  Utah, 
Sister  Josephine  was  chosen  as  a  coun- 
selor to  the  president.  Sister  Lester  J. 
Herrick.  On  two  occasions  she  was  a 
delegate  to  Washington,  D.  C,  in  the 


cause  of  women's  suffrage.  Sister 
West  was  president  of  the  first  Pri- 
mary Association  in  Weber  County, 
organized    in    the    Ogden    2nd    Ward, 


Feb.  15,  1879,  and  was  the  first  presi- 
dent of  the  old  Weber  Stake  Primary 
board  in  1880;  the  latter  position  she 
held  for  17  years.  Ph'^  was  also  the 
first  president  of  the  Weber  County 
company  of  the  Daughters  of  Utah 
Pioneers.  On  March  4,  1873,  she  was 
married  to  Joseph  A.  West  and  be- 
came the  mother  of  six  children,  name- 
ly, Jane  Richards,  Joseph  W.,  Ray  B  , 
Frank  L.,  Josephine  and  Charles  H. 
West;  also  Willard  and  George  West, 
who  died  in  infancy.  Sister  West  died 
at  Logan,  Utah,  April  23,  1933. 

WHITNEY,  Rebecca  Nibley,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  1906  to  1912, 
was  born  April  9,  1886,  in  Logan,  Utah, 
p.  daughter  of  Charles  W.  Nibley  and 
Rebecca  Neibaur.  She  was  baptized 
April  9,  1894,  in  the  St.  George  Tem- 


304 


LATTER-DAY    SAINT 


pie,  and  attended  the  public  schools 
in  Baker  City,  Oregon,  the  Latter-day 
Saints  College  and  the  University  of 
Utah.  She  was  a  student  for  two  years 
in  Miss  Summer's  school  for  girls  in 
New  York  City  and  studied  harp  and 
piano  in  the  Carnegie  School  of  Music 
there.  At  16  years  of  age  she  was 
secretary  of  a  Sunday  School  in  Ba- 
ker City,  Oregon,  and  later  was  a 
counselor  and  teacher  of  the  Primary 
Association  in  the  17th  Wai'd,  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  served  as  president 
of  the  Neighborhood  House  in  Salt 
Lake  City  from  1932  to  1935.  She 
has  acted  as  president  of  the  Chi  Beta 
Theta  Mothers'  Club,  and  of  the  Pi 
Beta  Phi  Mothers'  Club  and  is  a  Com- 
munity Chest  worker.  On  Jan.  19, 
1911,  she  was  married  to  Horace  Beat- 
tie  Whitney  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple 
and  is  the  mother  of  three  children, 
namely,  Horace  Nibley,  Rebecca  Nib- 
ley  and  Cathryn. 

WINDER,  Maria  Burnham,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  general  board  of  the  Pri- 
mary Association  from  June  27,  1906, 
to  March  24,  1911,  was  born  Sept.  30, 
1869,  at  Hyde  Park,  Utah,  a  daughter 
of  Luther  C.  Burnham  and  Matilda 
Barnett.  She  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old  by  her  father,  and  on  Oct. 
27,  1893,  was  married  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  to  John  R.  Winder  (later  a 
member  of  the  First  Presidency  of 
the  Church).  Sister  Winder  was  an 
ordinance  worker  in  the  Salt  Lake 
Temple  for  twenty-five  years  and  at 
present  (1936)  occupies  the  same  po- 
sition in  the  Mesa  Temple,  Arizona. 
She  has  assisted  in  compiling  a  gene- 
alogy of  the  Burnham  family  contain- 
ing over  40,000  names. 

WOOLLEY,  Florence  La  Dell  Low- 

ry,  assistant  secretary  to  the  general 
board  of  the  Primary  Association,  was 
born  Aug.  22,  1905,  at  Carey,  Idaho,  a 
daughter  of  John  Hyrum  Lowry  and 
Minnie  Taylor.  She  was  baptized  in 
August,  1914,  by  George  Romriel.  She 
attended  the  McCammon  High  School, 


the  Idaho  Technical  Institute  and  the 
University  of  Utah.  She  taught  school 
seven  years  in  Utah  and  Idaho,  was 
president  of  the  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.  in  the 
11th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  ap- 
pointed assistant  secretary  of  the  gen- 
eral board  of  the  Primary  Association 
in  December,  1933.  On  Nov.  7,  1936, 
she  was  married  to  Roscoe  Hunter 
Woolley. 

YOUNG,    Emmeline    McMaster,    a 

member  of  the  general  board  of  the 
Primary  Association,  was  born  Aug.  1, 
1873,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  daughter 
of  William  Athol  McMaster,  and  Sar- 
ah Hodder.  She  was  educated  in  the 
public  schools  of  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Academy.  She 
held  many  positions  of  trust  including 
that  of  Y.  L.  M.  I.  A.  secretary  in  the 
11th  Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  and  became 
a  member  of  the  general  board  of  Pri- 
mary Jan.  26,  1906.  Later  she  be- 
came treasurer  of  that  organization. 
From  1904  to  1905  she  served  as 
a  missionary  in  the  Chicago  Branch, 
Illinois,  under  the  direction  of  Pres. 
German  E.  Ellsworth.  On  Oct.  18, 
1913,  she  was  married  to  Marion  Ly- 
man Young  and  became  the  mother 
of  one  daughter,  Mary  Louise  Young. 
She  died  Dec.  10,  1915. 

YOUNG,  Afton,  a  member  of  the 
general  board  of  the  Primary  Associa- 
tion since  1920,  is  a  daughter  of  Le 
Grand  Young  and  Grace  Hardie.  She 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
educated  in  the  grade  schools  of  Salt 
Lake  City,  and  attended  the  Univer- 
sity of  Utah  four  years.  She  was  a 
music  student  with  Miss  Flandro  five 
years  and  is  a  teacher  in  kindergarten 
in  the  Salt  Lake  City  schools.  Sister 
Young  was  a  teacher  in  the  31st  Ward 
Primary  Association,  a  member  of  the 
Liberty  Stake  Primary  board  and 
taught  in  the  kindergarten  depart- 
ment of  the  31st  Ward  Sunday  school. 
She  was  a  member  of  the  Liberty 
Stake  M.  I.  A.  board,  a  member  of 
the   Board   of   Children's   Service   So- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


305 


ciety  for  many  years,  literary  leader 
in   the   Liberty   Stake   Relief    Society 


for  one  year  and  an  ordinance  worker 
in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  for  several 
years. 

♦> -«ic>^^^i» <♦ 

PRESIDENTS   OF   MISSIONS 

Note:  Under  this  heading  in  the  in- 
troductory notes,  the  presidents  of  the 
respective  missions  are  named  in 
chronological  order,  while  the  individ- 
ual biographical  sketches  in  most  in- 
stances, are  arranged  alphabetically. 


Armenian  Mission 

(A   Continuation   of  the   Turkish 
Mission) 


President: 
1924-1928. 


Joseph  Wilford  Booth, 


BOOTH,  Joseph  Wilford,  president 
of  the  Turkish  Mission  from  1904  to 
1909,  and  from  1921  to  1924,  and  pres- 
ident of  the  Armenian  Mission  from 
1924  to  1928,  was  bom  Aug.  14,  1866, 
in  Alpine,  Utah,  a  son  of  Richard  T. 


Booth  and  Elsie  Edge.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  14,  1874;  ordained  to  and 
labored  in  the  lesser  Priesthood  for 
a  number  of  years;  later  ordained  an 
Elder  and  still  later  a  Seventy.  He 
married  Mary  R.  Moyle  May  28,  1890, 
graduated  from  the  B.  Y.  Academy  in 
1896,  and  taught  school  for  a  number 
of  years.  After  visiting  Palestine  he 
lectured  on  the  Holy  Land  in  many 
wards  in  Zion.  His  first  mission  to 
Turkey  was  begun  Aug.  5,  1898, 
when  he  labored  in  Constantinople, 
Aleppo,  Aintab,  etc.,  and  while  in  Ain- 
tab  he  had  smallpox,  which  nearly  cost 
him  his  life.  He  returned  to  Utah  in 
May,  1902,  bringing  with  him  a  few 
Saints.  His  second  foreign  mission  was 
from  1903  to  1909,  during  which  time 
he  traveled  extensively  through  Asia 
Minor,  Egypt  and  Greece.  He  intro- 
duced the  Gospel  into  Greece,  kneel- 
ing with  his  wife  on  Mars  Hill  Oct. 
6,  1905,  and  dedicating  Greece  for  the 
opening  of  the  Gospel.  He  baptized 
a  few  converts,  organized  a  branch  in 
Athens,  and  returned  to  his  home  in 
Utah  in  1909.  He  was  set  apart  Sept. 
14,  1921,  for  the  Armenian  Mission 
to  act  as  president.  While  filling  that 
position  he  died  Dec.  5,  1928.  He 
was  buried  in  Aleppo,  Syria. 


Australasian  Mission 

Presidents:  John  Murdock,  1851- 
1852;  Charles  W.  Wandell,  1852-1853; 
Augustus  Farnham,  1853-1856;  Ab- 
salom P.  Dowdle,  1856-1857;  Andrew 
J.  Stewart,  1857-1858;  Thomas  Ford, 
1858-1863;  William  Broadbent,  1863- 
1865;  Robert  Beauchamp,  1865-1874; 
William  Geddes,  1874-1875;  Job  Well- 
ing, 1875-1876;  Isaac  Groo,  1876- 
1877;  Fred  J.  May  and  Thomas  A. 
Shreeve,  September-December,  1878; 
Elijah  F.  Pearce,  1878-1880;  George 
Batt,  1880-1881;  William  M.  Bromley, 
1881-1883;  William  T.  Stewart,  1883- 
1886;  William  Paxman,  1886-1889; 
Angus  Taylor  Wright,  1889-1890; 
John  S.  Bingham,  1890-1891;  William 


Vol.    IV,   No.   20 


May    16.    1936 


306 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


T.  Stewart  (2n(l  term),  1891-1893; 
William  Gardner,  1893-1896;  Ezra  F. 
Richards,  1896-1898. 

BATT,  George,  president  of  the 
Australasian  Mission  from  1880  to 
1881,  was  born  Aug.  20,  1854,  in 
Houghton,  Hampshire,  England,  a 
son  of  George  Batt  and  Hannah  Ray. 
He  was  baptized  June  8,  1875,  emi- 
grated to  Utah,  and  was  set  apart 
Oct.  10,  1878,  for  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralasia. He  arrived  thei-e  Feb.  28, 
1879,  and  when  Pres.  Elijah  F.  Pearce 
was  released  Dec.  25,  1880,  Bro.  Batt 
was  left  in  charge  of  the  Mission. 
He  was  succeeded  Jan.  20,  1881,  by 
Wm.  M.  Bromley,  and  returned  to 
Utah   May  28,   1881. 

BEAUCHAMP,  Robert  (also  called 
Dolling),  president  of  the  Australa- 
sion  Mission  from  1865  to  1874,  was 
born  June  5,  1818,  in  Plymouth,  Dev- 
onshire, England,  a  son  of  Samuel 
Dolling  and  Mary  Lacey.  He  went 
to  Australia  as  a  young  man  and 
was  baptized  at  Adelaide,  South  Aus- 
tralia, in  1841,  or  1842,  by  William 
Barrett,  the  first  missionary  to  Aus- 
tralia. In  1858,  on  account  of  the 
Johnston  Army  troubles,  all  the  Zion 
Elders  were  called  home,  and  Thomas 
Ford,  a  local  Elder,  was  appointed 
to  preside  over  the  Australasian  Mis- 
sion. He  was  ably  assisted  by  Elder 
Beauchamp  who  succeeded  Wm. 
Broadbent  as  president  of  the  mission 
in  1865,  which  position  he  held  until 
1868  when  he,  with  his  family,  emi- 
grated to  Zion.  A  year  later  (1869)  El- 
der Beauchamp  returned  to  Australia 
to  again  preside  over  that  mission.  He 
died  Sept.  7,  1890,  in  Geelong,  Vic- 
toria. 

BINGHAM,  John  Samuel,  presi- 
dent of  the  Australasian  Mission 
from  1890  to  1891,  was  born  Feb.  3, 
1860,  at  Payson,  Utah,  a  son  of  Perry 
L.  Bingham  and  Sarah  Elizabeth 
Lusk.     He  was  baptized  when  about 


eight  years  old,  was  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  Australasia  April  8,  1888, 
arrived  in  the  mission  field  June  23, 
1888,  was  appointed  president  of  the 
mission  Oct.  6,  1890,  succeeding  Angus 
Taylor  Wright,  and  acted  in  that  ca- 
pacity until  he  was  honorably  re- 
leased to  return  home  Sept.  13,  1891. 

BROADBENT,  William,  president 
of  the  Australasian  Mission  from  1863 
to  1865,  wrote  to  George  Q.  Cannon, 
stating  that  he  had  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Australasian  Mission 
since  the  death  of  Thomas  Ford  in 
1863. 

BROMLEY,  William  M.,  president 
of     the     Australasian     Mission     from 


1881    to    1883,    died    April    14,    1911. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  24). 

DOWDLE,  Absalom  Porter,  presi- 
dent of  the  Australasian  Mission 
from  1856  to  1857,  was  born  June  1, 
1819,  in  Franklin  County,  Alabama, 
a  son  of  Robert  Dowdle  and  Sarah 
Ann  Robinson.  He  married  Sarah 
Ann  Holladay  and  came  West  with 
the  so-called  Mississippi  Company  in 
1846,  and  spent  the  winter  at  Pueblo, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


307 


on  the  Arkansas  river.     He  was  ap-  GARDNER,    William,    president   of 

pointed  by  Elder  Wm.  Crosby  Nov.  the  Australasian  Mission  from  1893 
17,  1846,  to  preside  over  the  Saints  to  1896,  died  Feb.  4,  1932,  in  St. 
at  Fort  Pueblo. 

Bro.    Dowdle    and    family    and    the  -■■  ?^^ 

other  families  of  the  Pueblo  Com- 
pany, following  in  the  wake  of  the 
Utah  Pioneers  in  1847,  arrived  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  July  29,  1847, 
with  Capt.  James  Brown's  detach- 
ment of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  which 
had  also  wintered  at  Pueblo.  Elder 
Dowdle  was  called  to  fill  a  mission 
to  Australia,  arriving  at  Sydney 
April  1,  1852.  When  Pres.  Augustus 
Farnham  sailed  from  Sydney  May  28, 

1856,  he  left  Absalom  P.  Dowdle  in 
charge  of  the  Australasian  Mission. 
Elder  Dowdle  presided  until  June  27, 

1857,  when  he  sailed  on  the  ship  "Lu- 
cas," homeward  bound. 


FARNHAM,  Augustus,  president 
of  the  Australasian  Mission  from 
1853  to  1856,  was  born  May  20,  1805, 
in  Andover,  Essex  Co.,  Mass.,  a  son  of 
Peter  and  Chloe  Farnham.  He  was 
baptized  April  21,  1843,  ordained  a 
Seventy  Aug.  17,  1845,  was  called  to 
fill  a  mission  to  Australasia,  arriving 
in  Sydney  April  1,  1851,  on  the  ship 
"Pacific".  He  became  president  of 
the  mission  by  vote  April  10,  1853, 
and  left  for  home  May  28,  1856,  on 
the  ship  "Jenny  Ford."  Elder  Farn- 
ham died  May  2,  1865,  at  Farming- 
ton,   Utah. 

FORD,  Thomas,  a  local  Elder,  pres- 
ident of  the  Australasian  Mission 
from  May,  1858  to  1863,  died  in  Aus- 
tralia in  1863  while  presiding  over 
the  mission. 

GEDDES,  William,  president  of  the 
Australasian  Mission  from  1874  to 
1875,  died  Aug.  23,  1899,  in  Plain 
City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.   462.) 

GROO,  Isaac,  president  of  the 
Australasian  Mission  from  1876  to 
1877,  died  Jan.  24,  1895,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  93.) 


George,  Utah. 
3,  p.  379.) 


(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 


MAY,  Fredrick  John,  president  of 
the  Australasian  Mission  from  Au- 
gust to  December,  1878,  was  bom 
Jan.  16,  1844,  in  Southampton,  Hamp- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  John  May 
and  Mary  Lewis.  Having  relatives 
in  Utah,  he  emigrated  to  America 
in  1866  and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
the  following  year.  Becoming  con- 
vinced of  the  truth  of  "Mormonism", 
he  was  baptized  May  6,  1868.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  14,  1876,  by 
Robert  Patrick,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Australasia  in  1878-1881,  being  ap- 
pointed president  Sept.  15,  1878,  with 
Thomas  A.  Shreeve  as  his  assistant. 
He  returned  to  Utah  in  July,  1880, 
with  a  small  company  of  Saints.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  Arizona  in  1882- 
1884,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  4,  1904,  by  David  McKenzie,  and 
died  May  19,  1910,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah. 

MURDOCK,  John,  president  of  the 
Australasian  Mission  from  1851  to 
1852,  died  Dec.  23,  1871,  in  Beaver, 
Utah.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  362.) 


308 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


PAXMAN,  William,  president  of  1898,  He  also  filled  a  short  term 
the  Australasian  Mission  from  1886  mission  to  Southern  Utah,  Colorado 
to  1889,  died  Oct.  12,  1897,  in  Amer-  and  Montana  in  1903-1904,  and  an- 
other short  term  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1926-1927.  Elder  Richards 
was  set  apart  April  7,  1896,  to  pre- 
side over  the  Australasian  Mission 
and  returned  home  May  23,  1898.  He 
died  Feb.  1, 1930,  in  Farmington,  Utah. 

SHREEVE,  Thomas  A.,  president 
conjointly  of  the  Australasian  Mis- 
sion from  September  to  December, 
1878.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  708.) 
(See  also  Fred  J.  May.) 

STEWART,  Andrew  Jackson,  pres- 
ident of  the  Australasian  Mission 
from  1857  to  1858,  was  born  Sept. 
12,  1819,  in  Jackson  township,  Mon- 
roe Co.,  Ohio,  a  son  of  Philander  Bar- 
rett Stewart  and  Sally  Scott.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  18,  1844,  in  Van 
Buren  County,  Ohio,  and  with  his 
wife,  Eunice  Peas  Haws,  whom  he 
had  married  Jan.  1,  1844,  moved  to 
Nauvoo  the  following  October.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1850,  arriving  as 
captain  of  a  company  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Sept.  16,  1850;  was  one  of  the 
first  settlers  of  Payson,  Utah,  and 
did  a  great  deal  of  surveying  in  Utah 
and  Nevada.  In  1855  he  accompa- 
nied Orson  Hyde  to  Carson  Valley  to 
survey  that  country  and  to  estab- 
lish the  boundary  line  between  Utah 
and  California.  In  1856  he  was  sent 
on  a  mission  to  Australia,  but  stop- 
ped in  Carson  two  months,  survey- 
ing the  lands  for  settlers  and  help- 
ing Apostle  Orson  Hyde  to  organ- 
ize the  branches  of  the  Church  in 
Carson  Valley.  He  crossed  the  Si- 
erra Nevada  Mountains  with  George 
S.  Clark,  of  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah, 
took  ship  from  San  Francisco  to  Mel- 
bourne, Australia,  and  after  his  ar- 
rival there  Dec.  12,  1856,  he  was 
sustained  as  president  of  the  Aus- 
tralasian Mission,  at  a  conference 
held  at  Sydney  June  7,  1857.  He  re- 
turned home  in  November,  1859,  and 
died  Dec.  7,  1911,  at  Benjamin,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah. 


ican    Fork,    Utah.      (See    Bio.    Ency., 
Vol.  1,  p.  515.) 

PEARCE,  Elijah  F.,  president  of 
the  Australasian  Mission  from  1878 
to  1880,  was  born  Sept.  4,  1831,  in 
Newton,  England,  a  son  of  Geo. 
Pearce  and  Esther  Pollard.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  1,  1851,  emigrated 
to  Utah,  and  was  set  apart  Oct.  10, 
1878,  for  a  mission  to  New  Zealand, 
arriving  there  Dec.  18,  1878.  On 
Dec.  25,  1878,  he  took  charge  of  the 
Australasian  Mission,  succeeding  El- 
ders Thomas  A.  Shreeve  and  Fred  J. 
May.  Pres.  Pearce  made  his  head- 
quarters at  Christchurch,  New  Zea- 
land, and  his  labors  were  largely 
concentrated  in  that  part  of  the  mis- 
sion. He  left  Auckland  March  3, 
1880,  homeward  bound.  He  died 
June  30,  1922,  in   Salt  Lake  City. 

RICHARDS,  Ezra  Foss,  president 
of  the  Australasian  Mission  from 
1896  to  1898,  was  born  July  27, 
1860,  in  Farmington,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Franklin  D.  Richards  and  Rhoda 
Harriet  Foss.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  8  years  old,  and  filled  two  mis- 
sions to  New  Zealand,  the  first  one  in 
1884-1888    and    the    second    one    1894- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


309 


STEWART,  William  Thomas,  pres- 
ident of  the  New  Zealand  part  of  the 
Australasian  Mission,  from  1883  to 
1886,  and  from  1891  to  1893,  was 
born  Oct.  18,  1853,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Levi  Stewart  and 
Marjorie  Wilkerson.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  November,  1861,  was  active 
in  the  Church,  as  well  as  being  a 
prominent  member  of  the  southern 
Utah  community,  served  on  three 
missions  for  the  Church,  the  first 
among  the  Navajo  Indians  in  the 
southwest,  and  two  later  missions  in 
New  Zealand,  being  set  apart  for  the 
first  one  April  30,  1883,  and  return- 
ing May  25,  1886.  He  arrived  in 
New  Zealand  on  his  second  mission 
Aug.  13,  1891,  to  act  as  president  of 
the  Australasian  Mission,  and  left 
there  Dec.  30,  1893,  to  return  home. 
Elder  Stewart  died  Aug.  22,  1935,  in 
Alamo,  Nevada. 

WAN  DELL,  Charles  Wesley,  pres- 
ident of  the  Australasian  Mission 
from    1852    to    1853,   died    March    14, 

1875.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  551.) 

WELLING,  Job,  president  of  the 
Australasian    Mission    from    1875    to 

1876,  was  born  Jan.  9,  1833,  in  Aud- 
lum,  Cheshire,  England,  ,  a  son  of 
John  Welling  and  Ann  Key.  Becom- 
ing a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  in  his 
native  land,  he  was  baptized  Jan.  9, 
1852,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1856, 
settling  in  Farmington.  He  was  set 
apai't  for  a  mission  April  11,  1875, 
and  returned  from  his  mission  March 
13,  1877,  after  circumnavigating  the 
globe.  For  several  years  he  acted 
as  second  counselor  to  Bishop  Hess 
of  the  Farmington  Ward,  and  later 
as  a  counselor  in  the  High  Priests' 
quorum  of  the  Davis  Stake.  He  died 
at  his  residence  at  Farmington 
March  7,  1886,  of  heart  disease,  leav- 
ing a  wife  and  21  children.  His  first 
wife  died  some  years  previous. 

WRIGHT,  Angus  Taylor,  president 
of  the  Australasian  Mission  from 
1889  to  1890,  was  born  July  24,  1856, 


in  Philadelphia,  Penn.,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam H.  Wright  and  Emma  Taylor. 
He  was  baptized  July  24,  1864,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Jan.  3,  1883,  by 
Louis  F.  Moench,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  Australasia  (New  Zealand),  being 
set  apart  Oct.  16,  1887,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman.  He  presided  over  the  mis- 
sion from  Aug.  12,  1889,  to  Nov.  2, 
1890.  Elder  Wright  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  1890  by  Moses  Thatch- 
er, and  died  May  12,  1928.  (See  also 
New  Zealand  Mission.) 


Australian  Mission 

Presidents:  Andrew  Smith,  jun., 
1897-1898;  Frederick  Ellis  Barker, 
1898-1900;  George  H.  Islaub,  March- 
June,  1900;  John  B.  Mathias,  pro 
tern.,  June-November,  1900;  Andrew 
Fjeld,  1900-1901;  James  Duckworth, 
1901-1906;  William  Armstrong,  1906- 
1908;  Charles  Alvin  Orine,  1908-1911; 
Charles  H.  Hyde,  1911-1913;  William 
W.  Taylor,  1913-1914;  Don  C.  Rush- 
ton,  1914-1917;  Arnold  D.  Miller, 
1917-1920;  Don  C.  Rushton  (2nd 
term),  1920-1924;  Charles  H.  Hyde 
(2nd  term),  1924-1928;  Clarence  H. 
Tingey,  1928-1931. 

ARMSTRONG,  William,  president 
of  the  Australian  Mission  from  1906 


310 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


to   1908.     (See  Bio.   Ency.,  Vol.   3,  p. 
588.) 

BARKER,  Fred  Ellis,  president  of 
the  Australian  Mission  from  1898  to 
1900,  was  born  May  6,  1861,  in  Og- 
den,  Utah,  a  son  of  Simon  Barker 
and  Jemima  Newey.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  5,  1869,  set  apart  for  his 
mission  to  Australia  Dec.  22,  1897, 
and  returned  April  28,  1902.  He  died 
Nov.   12,  1922,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

FJELD,  Andrew,  president  of  the 
Australian  Mission  from  1900  to  1901. 
<See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  629.) 

HYDE,  Charles  H.,  president  of 
the  Australian  Mission  from  1911  to 
1913  and  from  1924  to  1928,  died  Jan. 
3,  1936,  in  Salt  Lake  City.  (See  also 
Pionoer  Stake.) 

DUCKWORTH,  James,  president 
of  the  Australian  Mission  from  1901 


to    1906. 
63.) 


(See  Bio.   Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p. 


ISLAUB,  George  H.,  president  of 
the  Australian  Mission  from  March 
to  June,  1900,  was  born  Aug.  22,  1859, 
in  Liet,  New  South  Wales,  Australia, 


a  son  of  George  Islaub  and  Margaret 
Weidman.     He  was  baptized   May  6, 

1883,  came  to  Utah  many  years  ago, 
and  was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  his 
native  land  May  12,  1899,  from  which 
he  returned  in  1900.  He  acted  as 
recorder  in  Salt  Lake  County  from 
1915  to  1918,  was  an  extensive  trav- 
eler, touring  much  in  the  South  Seas. 
He  was  active  in  political  and  civic 
life,  and  served  as  postmaster  at  one 
time  in  Ogden,  Utah.  He  died  very 
suddenly  Feb.  23,  1926,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  and  was  buried  in  Ogden. 

MATHIAS,  John  B.,  president  pro 
tem.  of  the  Australian  Mission  from 
June  to  November  1900,  was  born 
Oct.  29,  1875,  in  Nephi,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Jonah  Mathias  and  Abigail  Bur- 
banks.      He    was    baptized    Sept.    1, 

1884,  was  set  apart  for  his  mission 
to  Australia  May  12,  1899,  depart- 
ed from  Australia  Feb.  26,  1901,  and 
returned   to    Utah   March  2,   1901. 

MILLER,  Arnold  D.,  president  of 
the  Australian  Mission  from  1917  to 
1920,  was  born  March  2,  1852,  in 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  the  son  of  Hen- 
ry W.  Miller  and  Elmira  Pond.  He 
came  to  Utah  with  his  parents  that 
same  year,  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  grew  to  manhood  in  St. 
George,  Utah,  served  in  the  Bishop- 
ric of  the  first  ward  which  was  or- 
ganized in  the  Bannock  Stake,  Idaho, 
served  in  the  Union  Ward,  Oregon, 
Bishopric,  assisted  in  the  organization 
of  the  Gridley  Ward,  California,  and 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  St.  An- 
thony Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake,  from 
1909  to  1916.  He  was  married  to 
Mary  Jane  Lamb  Dec.  4,  1873;  and 
they  were  the  parents  of  nine  chil- 
dren. He  and  his  wife  were  set  apart 
Jan.  4,  1917,  for  their  mission  to  Au- 
stralia and  labored  there  four  years. 
Upon  his  arrival  in  Utah  Elder  Miller 
and  wife  made  their  home  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  where  Sister  Miller  died  in 
September,    1923.    Elder    Miller    later 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


311 


married   Edith  Willsea,   a  convert  to  SMITH,  Andrew,  jun.,  president  of 

the  Church  from  Melbourne,  Austral-      the  Australian  Mission  from  1897  to 


ia,   and   died   Sept.   23,   1924,   in   Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah. 

ORME,   C.   Alvin,  president  of  the 
Australian  Mission  from  1908  to  1911, 


1898.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  602.) 


1 

PV 

1 

P^-^^H 

W^bt^  ''^  ^^B^^^^H 

died  Nov.   16,  1932.    (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.   1,  p.   546  and  Vol.  3,  p.  188.) 

RUSHTON,  Don  Carlos,  president 
of  the  Australian  Mission  from  1914 
to  1917,  and  from  1920  to  1924,  was 
born  March  8,  1864,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Edvi^in  Rushton 
and  Sarah  Naomi  Robinson.  He  was 
baptized  July  28,  1872,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1893- 
1896,  and  another  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1908-1910.  He  was  set 
apart  July  15,  1914,  for  his  first 
mission  to  Australia  and  returned 
Oct.  26,  1917;  he  was  set  apart  for 
his  second  mission  to  Australia  Oct. 
19,  1920,  and  returned  Sept.  21,  1924. 

TAYLOR,  William  Weldon,  presi- 
dent (pro  tem.)  of  the  Australian  Mis- 
sion from  1913  to  1914,  was  born 
Dec.  9,  1883,  in  Provo,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  Joseph  Taylor  and  Abby 
Jane  Scott.  He  was  baptized  June 
25,  1891,  set  apart  for  his  mission 
to  Australia  June  5,  1912,  and  re- 
turned  Sept.  22,   1914. 


TINGEY,  Clarence  Home,  presi- 
dent of  the  Australian  Mission  from 
1928  to  1931,  was  born  Dec.  18,  1891, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Joseph  S.  Tingey  and  Martha  J. 
Home.  He  was  baptized  in  January, 
1900,  filled  a  mission  to  Australia  in 
1917-1919,  and  was  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Australian  Mission  Oct. 
9,   1928.     He  returned  home  in   1931. 


British  Mission 


Presidents:  Heber  C.  Kimball, 
1837-1838;  Joseph  Fielding,  et  al., 
1838-1840;  Brigham  Young,  1840- 
1841;  Parley  P.  Pratt,  1841-1842; 
Thomas  Ward,  1842-1843;  Reuben 
Hedlock,  1843-1845;  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff, 1845-1846;  Orson  Hyde,  1846- 
1847;  Franklin  D.  Richards  (ad  in- 
terim), January  to  February,  1847; 
Orson  Spencer,  1847-1848;  Orson 
Pratt,  1848-1851;  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ards, 1851-1852;  Samuel  W.  Rich- 
ards, 1852-1854;  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ards (second  term),  1854-1856;  Or- 
son  Pratt    (second   term),    1856-1857; 


312 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Samuel  W.  Richards  (second  term), 
1857-1858;  Asa  Calkin,  1858-1860; 
Nathaniel  V.  Jones,  et  al.,  May,  1860 
to  Aug.,  1860;  Amasa  M.  Lyman  and 
Charles  C.  Rich,  1860-1862;  George 
Q.  Cannon,  1862-1864;  Daniel  H. 
Wells  and  Brigham  Young,  jun., 
1864-1865;  Brigham  Young,  jun., 
1865-1867;  Franklin  D.  Richards 
(third  term),  1867-1868;  Albert  Car- 
rington,  1868-1870;  Horace  S.  El- 
dredge,  1870-1871;  Albert  Carring- 
ton  (second  term),  1871-1873;  Lester 
J.  Herrick,  pro  tern.,  1873-1874;  Jos- 
eph F.  Smith,  1874-1875;  Albert  Car- 
rington  (third  term),  1875-1877;  Jos- 
eph F.  Smith  (second  term),  1877- 
1878;  William  Budge,  1878-1880;  Al- 
bert Carrington  (foui-th  term),  1880- 
1882;  John  Henry  Smith,  1882-1885; 
Daniel  H.  Wells  (second  term),  1885- 
1887;  George  Teasdale,  1887-1890; 
Brigham  Young,  jun.,  (second  term), 
1890-1893;  Alfred  Solomon,  pro  tem., 
1893;  Anthon  H.  Lund,  1893-1896; 
Rulon  S.  Wells,  et  al.,  1896-1898; 
Platte  D.  Lyman,  1898-1901;  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  1901-1904;  Heber  J. 
Grant,  1904-1906;  Charles  W.  Pen- 
rose, 1906-1910;  Rudger  Clawson, 
1910-1913;  E.  Taft  Benson,  pro  tern., 
April,  1913-September,  1913;  Hyrum 
M.  Smith,  1913-1916;  George  F.  Rich- 
ards, 1916-1919;  George  Albert 
Smith,  1919-1921;  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney, 1921-1922;  David  0.  McKay, 
1922-1924;  James  E.  Talmage,  1924- 
1927;  John  A.  Widtsoe,  1927-1928;  A. 
William  Lund,  1928-1932. 

BENSON,  Ezra  Taft,  president 
pro  tem.  of  the  British  Mission  in 
1913,  was  born  Sept.  29,  1882,  in  Lo- 
gan, Utah,  the  son  of  Brigham  Y. 
Benson  and  Margaret  Adams.  He 
was  baptized  in  April,  1892,  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  England  Feb. 
21,  1911.  He  became  secretary  of 
the  British  Mission  March  13,  1913, 
and  acted  as  president  of  the  same 
pro  tem.  from  April  17  to  Oct.  11, 
1913. 


BUDGE,  William,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1878  to  1881, 
had  labored  about  ten  years  as  a  mis- 
sionary in  Great  Britain  before  emi- 


r 


grating  to  America  in  1860.  Pres. 
Budge  was  released  as  president  of 
the  Bear  Lake  Stake  and  made  presi- 
dent of  the  Logan  Temple,  which 
position  he  held  when  he  passed 
away,  March  1?  1919,  in  Logan,  Utah. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  451.) 

CALKIN,  Asa,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1858  to  1860, 
was  born  July  5,  1809,  in  Essex  Coun- 
ty, New  York,  a  son  of  John  and 
Lucy  Calkin.  He  was  baptized  in 
March,  1848,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  6,  1849,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
England  in  1855-1860.  On  his  arrival 
in  Liverpool,  Dec.  9,  1855,  he  was  as- 
signed to  the  business  department  of 
the  Mission  Office;  he  also  acted  as 
first  counselor  to  Pres,  Samuel  W. 
Richards.  On  March  6,  1858,  when 
the  other  Elders  from  Zion  were 
called  home,  he  was  appointed  pres- 
ident of  the  British  Mission,  and  as- 
sumed also  the  editorship  of  the  "Mil- 
lennial Star",  which  position  he  held 
until  April  7,  1860,  when  he  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Nathaniel  V.  Jones.  He 
sailed  May  11,  1860,  for  America  on 
the  ship   "William  Tapscott."     Elder 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


313 


Calkin  died  in  St.  George,  Utah,  Feb. 
15,  1873. 

CANNON,  George  Q.,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1862  to  1864. 
(See  Bio.  EIncy.,  Vol.  1,  p.  42.) 


CLAWSON,    Rudger,    president  of 

the     British     Mission    from     1910  to 

1913.       (See    Bio.    Ency.,   Vol.    1,  p. 
174.) 


CARRINGTON,    Albert,    president 
of  the  British  Mission  from  1868  to  ELDREDGE,   Horace   S.,   president 

1870,   from   1871   to   1873,  from   1875      ^^  ^he   British  Mission  from   1870  to 

1871.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  196.) 


to  1877  and  from  1880  to  1882,  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  Sept.  19, 
1^9.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  126.) 


314 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


FIELDING,  Joseph,  president  of  England  in  1843,  arriving  in  Liver- 
the  British  Mission  from  1838  to  pool,  Sept.  30,  1843.  In  Novem- 
1840,  died  Dec.  19,  1863.  (See  Bio.  her,  1843,  he  was  made  president  of 
Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  762.)  the  British  Mission,  but  was  released 

April  6,  1845. 

HERRICK,  Lester  J.,  president 
(pro  tern.)  of  the  British  Mission 
from  1873  to  1874.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  2,  p.  288.) 


GRANT,  Heber  J.,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1904  to  1906. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  147  and 
Vol.  3,  p.  746.) 


HEDLOCK, 

the  British  Mi 
was  set  apart 
Britain    April 
cessfully    in 
He    retui-ned 
1841,    was    or 
Oct.  3,  1841, 
was  called  to 


Reuben,  president  of 
ssion  from  1843  to  1845, 

for  a  mission  to  Great 

6,  1840,  laboring  suc- 
England    and    Scotland. 

to  America  in  April, 
dained  a  High  Priest, 
in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  and 

fill   another  mission   to 


HYDE,  Orson,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1846  to  1847, 
died  Nov.  28,  1878.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  1,  p.  80.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


316 


JONES,  Nathaniel  V.,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  May  to 
AujTust,  1860.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
2,  p.  368.) 


LUND,  Anthon  H.,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1893  to  1896. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  161,  and 
Vol.  3,  p.  753.) 


KIM  BALL,  Heber  C,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1837  to 
1838.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  34.) 


LUND,  A.  William,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1929  to  1932. 
He  was  ably  assisted  by  his  wife,  Jos- 
ephine B.  Lund,  who  was  born  Oct.  3, 
1886,  at  Salt  Lake  City.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  754.) 


316 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


LYMAN,  Amasa  M.,  assisted  by 
Charles  C.  Rich,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1860  to  1862. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  96.) 


Amasa  M.  Lyman  was  born  March 
30,  1913,  in  Lyman  Township,  Grafton 
Co.,  New  Hampshire,  and  died  at  Fill- 
more, Utah  Feb.  4,  1877. 


LYMAN,  Platte  D.,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1898  to 
1901.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  153.) 


LYMAN,  Francis  M.,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1901  to 
1904.  During  his  administration  he 
made  a  visit  to  Egypt  and  the  Holy 
Land.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  136 
and  Vol.  3,  p.  755.) 


Francis  M.  Lyman  died  as  president 
of  the  Council  of  Twelve  Apostles  No- 
vember 18,  1916,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  His  remains  were  buried  in 
Tooele,  Utah. 


McKAY,  David  O.,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1922  to  1924. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  760.) 


David  O.  McKay  now  holds  the  posi- 
tion of  second  counselor  in  the  First 
Presidency. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


317 


PENROSE,    Charles    W.,    president 
of  the   British    Mission   from   1906  to 


PRATT,  Orson,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1848  to  1851 
and  from  1856  to  1857.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  87.) 


1910,  died  May  16,  1925,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  256 
and  Vol.  3,  p.  369.) 

PRATT,  Parley  P.,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1841  to  1842. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  83.) 


RICHARDS,  Franklin  D.,  president 
of  the  British  Mission  from  January 
to  February,  1847,  from  1851  to  1852, 
from  1854  to  1856,  and  from  1867  to 
1868,    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  115.) 


Parley  P.  Pratt  was  murdered  May 
13,  1857,  near  Van  Buren,  Arkansas. 


318 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


RICHARDS,    George    F.,    president  SMITH,    George    Albert,    president 

of  the   British   Mission   from   1916   to  of  the   British   Mission  from   1919  to 

1919.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  544,  1921.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  776.) 
and  Vol.  3,  p.  772.) 


Elder  Richards  has  for  many  years 
been     president     of    the    Salt     Lake 

Temple.  SMITH,    Hyrum    M.,    president    of 

the     British     Mission     from     1913    to 

RICHARDS,  Samuel   W.,  president 
of  the   British   Mission   from   1852   to 


1854,    and    from    1857    to    1858,    died 

Nov.  26,  1901).     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.      1916.       (See    Bio.    Ency.,    Vol.    1,    p. 

1,  p.  718.)  772,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  779.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


319 


SMITH,  John  Henry,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1882  to 
1885.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  141, 
and  Vol.  3,  p.  780.) 


SOLOMON,  Alfred,  president  (pro 
tern.)  of  the  British  Mission  in  1893, 
died  April  17,  1921.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  1,  p.  681.) 


SMITH,  Joseph  F.,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1874  to  1875 
and  from  1877  to  1878.  (See  Bio 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  66,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  78.) 


SPENCER,  Orson,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1847  to  1848. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  37.) 


Joseph  F.  Smith  presided  over  the 
Church  from  Oct.  17,  1901  to  Nov.  19, 
1918.  On  the  latter  date  he  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City. 


320 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


TALMAGE,  James  E.,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1924  to 
1927,  died  July  27,  1933,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  787.) 


TEASDALE,  George,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1887  to  1890, 
died  June  9,  1907.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  1,  p.  144,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  790.) 


Star"  in  that  year.  He  was  appoint- 
ed president  of  the  British  Mission 
Oct.  10,  1842,  by  Elder  Parley  P. 
Pratt,  and  acted  as  editor  of  the 
"Star"  as  well.  He  was  released  in 
November,  1843. 

WELLS,  Daniel  H.,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1864  to 
1865,  and  also  from  1885  to  1887,  died 
March  24,  1891.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  62.) 


WARD,  Thomas,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1842  to 
1843,  was  born  Sept.  5,  1808,  in  Lud- 
low, Shropshire,  Enjjland.  He  was 
baptized  and  took  an  active  part  in 
the  Church  in  England,  acting  as 
clerk  of  the  Mission  in  1842,  as  well 
as     joint    editor    of    the     "Millennial 


WELLS,  Rulon  S.,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1896  to  1898. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  212.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL-  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


321 


WHITNEY,  Orson  F.,  president  of  WOODRUFF,     Wilford,     president 

the    British    Mission    from    1921    to  of  the  British   Mission  from   1845  to 

1922,    died    May    16,    1931,    in    Salt  1846,  died  in  California  Sept.  2,  1898. 

Lake   City.     (See   Bio.   Ency.,   Vol.   1,  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  20.) 
p.  658,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  793.) 


i  _ 


YOUNG,  Brig  ham,  president  of  the 
British  Mission  from  1840  to  1841, 
died  Aug.  29,  1877,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  8.) 


WIDTSOE,  John  A.,  president  of 
the  British  Mission  from  1927  to 
1928.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  768, 
and  Vol.  3,  p.  735.) 


Brigham  Young,  the  second  presi- 
dent of  the  Church,  presided  in  that 
capacity  from  1844  to  1877. 


Vol.  IV,  No.  21 


May  23,  1936 


322 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


YOUNG,  Brigham,  jun.,  president 
of  the  British  Mission  from  1865  to 
1867,    and    from    1890    to    1893,    died 


tized  April  15,  1852,  came  to  Utah, 
and  was  set  apart  Aug.  10,  1892,  for 
a  mission  to  California.  Having  filled 
a  successful  mission  he  left  San  Fran- 
cisco Feb.  23,  1894,  for  home,  accom- 
panied by  his  family. 


April  11,  1903.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  121.) 


California  Mission 

Presidents:  Samuel        Brannan, 

1846-1849;  Charles  C.  Rich,  1849- 
1851;  Parley  P.  Pratt,  1851-1852; 
Amasa  M.  Lyman  and  Charles  C. 
Rich,  1853-1854;  Parley  P.  Pratt 
(second  term),  1854-1855;  George  Q. 
Cannon,  1856-1858.  (After  the  year 
1858  no  organized  missionary  labor 
was  done  in  California  until  1892.) 
John  L.  Dalton,  1892-1894;  Karl  G. 
Maeser,  January-August,  1894;  Henry 
S.  Tanner,  1894-1896;  Ephraim  H.  Nye, 
1896-1901;  Joseph  E.  Robinson,  1901- 
1919;  Joseph  W.  McMurrin,  1919- 
1932. 

BRANNAN,  Samuel,  president  of 
the  California  Mission  from  1846  to 
1849,  died  in  California  May  14,  1889. 
(See  Bio,  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  606.) 

DALTON,  John  Luther,  president 
of  the  California  Mission  from  1892 
to  1894,  was  born  Oct.  18,  1843,  in 
Nauvoo,  111.,  a  son  of  Chas.  Dalton 
and  Mary  E.  Warner.     He  was  bap- 


CANNON,  George  Q.,  president  of 
the   California  Mission  from   1856   to 
1858,    died    in    California    April    10}^ 
1901.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  42.) 

LYMAN,  Amasa  M.,  et  al.,  presi- 
dent of  the  California  Mission  from 
1853  to  1854,  died  Feb.  4,  1877.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  96.) 

MAESER,  Karl  G.,  president  of  the 
California  Mission  from  January  to 
August,  1894.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  707.) 


NYE,  Ephraim  Hesmer,  president 
of  the  California  Mission  from  1896 
to  1901,  was  born  Aug.  6,  1845,  in 
Ashford,  Kent,  England,  the  son  of 
John  Nye  and  Charlotte  Osborne.  He 
was  baptized  in  1857,  in  England,  and 
came  to  Utah  in  early  manhood.  He 
filled   a   mission   to   Great   Britain   in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


323 


1881-1884,  labored  in  the  Eastern 
States  Mission,  being  set  apart  Jan. 
7,    1902,    and   being    released   July   3, 

1902,  to  act  as  president  of  the  South- 
ern States  Mission.    He  died  May  15, 

1903,  in  Columbia,  South  Carolina, 
while  acting  as  president  of  the 
Southern  States  Mission. 

McMURRIN,  Joseph  W.,  president 
of  the  California  Mission  from  1919 
to  1932,  died  Oct.  24,  1932,  in  Los 
Angeles,  California.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  1,  p.  216.) 


ROBINSON,  Joseph  E.,  president 
of  the  California  Mission  from  1901 
to  1919.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p. 
219.) 


PRATT,  Addison,  who  was  appoint- 
ed to  preside  over  the  San  Francisco 
Branch  Dec.  2,  1847,  by  Samuel  Bran- 
nan,  died  in  California  Oct.  14,  1872. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  698.) 

Addison  Pratt  had  just  returned  to 
America  from  an  important  mission  to 
the  Society  Islands,  and  only  presided 
in  California  a  short  time  before  he 
continued  his  journey  to  Salt  Lake 
City  where  he  joined  his  family. 


PRATT,  Parley  P.,  president  of  the 
California  Mission  from  1851  to  1852, 
and  fi'om  1854  to  1855,  was  assassi- 
nated in  Arkansas  May  13,  1857.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  83.) 


TANNER,  Henry  S.,  president  of 
the  California  Mission  from  1894  to 
1896,  died  May  23,  1935.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  717.) 


324 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


RICH,  Charles  C,  president  of  the  side  over  the  newly  organized  Canadi- 
CaHfornia  Mission  from  1849  to  1851.  an  Mission  April  22,  1919,  was  set 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  102.)  apart  to  that  position  June  17,  1919, 


1 

A 

life 

--1 

i 

tf^fS 

1 

^ 

^^^^ 

Wr\ 

1 

L. 

.^■^ 

B^ 

'. 

Canadian  Mission 

Presidents:  Parley  P.  Pratt,  1836- 
1837;  Nephi  Jensen,  1920-1923;  Joseph 
Quinney,  1923-1927;  Charles  H,  Hart, 
1927-1930. 

JENSEN,  Nephi,  president  of  the 
Canadian  Mission  from  1920  to  1923, 
was  born  Feb.  16,  1876,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Soren  Jensen 
and  Kirstine  Rasmussen.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1898-1900,  and  a  second  mission  to 
the  same  place  in  1906-1908.  He  was 
educated  in  the  local  and  high  schools 
at  Mancos,  Colorado,  also  attended 
the  L.  D.  S.  College  and  University 
of  Utah,  and  was  graduated  with  his 
L.  L.  B.  from  the  University  of  Chat- 
tanooga, Tenn.,  taught  school  fi-om 
1901  to  1906,  was  a  member  of  the 
Utah  Legislature  from  1906  to  1908, 
was  assistant  county  attorney  from 
1910  to  1913,  and  is  a  member  of  the 
Utah  State  and  American  Bar  Associ- 
ation. Elder  Jensen  is  unusually  tal- 
ented as  a  speaker,  a  writer  and  au- 
thor. He  mai-ried  Miss  Margaret 
Smith  April  9,  1902,  and  they  have  one 
son.  Elder  Jensen  was  called  to  pre- 


and  returned  April  2,  1923,  after  per- 
forming a  successful  mission. 

QUINNEY,  Joseph,  jun.,  president 
of   the   Canadian   Mission   from   1923 


to  1927.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  201.) 
201.) 

YOUNG,  Joseph,  one  of  the  first 
Latter-day  Saint  missionaries  in 
Canada,  labored  there  in  1832  and 
1833.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  187.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


325 


HART,  Charles  H.,  president  of  the 
Canadian  Mission  from  1927  to  1930, 
died  Sept.  29,  1934,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  748.) 

PRATT,  Parley  P.,  was  the  first 
president  of  the  Canadian  Mission, 
who  practically  opened  the  mission  for 
permanent  missionary  work  in  1836. 
There  have  been  Saints  in  Canada 
since  1832,  but  the  small  branches 
raised  up  in  the  Dominion  of  Canada 
belonged  to  missions  in  the  United 
States  until  1920.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  83.) 


Colorado  Mission 

Presidents:  John  W.  Taylor,  1896- 
1901;  Joseph  A.  McRae,  1901-1907. 
(The  Colorado  Mission  was  continued 
as  the  Western  States  Mission  in 
1907.) 

McRAE,  Joseph  A.,  president  of 
the  Colorado  Mission  from  1901  to 
1907,  was  born  March  19,  1865,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jos. 
McRae  and  Maria  Taylor.  He  was 
baptized  in  1873,  and  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Colorado  March  19,  1899. 
He  was  made  president  of  the  Mis- 
sion March  7,  1901,  and  acted  in  that 
capacity  until  his  release  in  1907. 


TAYLOR,  John  W.,  president  of 
the  Colorado  Mission  from  1896  to 
1901.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  151.) 


Central  States  Mission 


Presidents: 
1906;    Samuel 


James  G.  Duffin,  1904- 
O.   Bennion,    1906-1933. 


DUFFIN,    James    G.,    president    of 
the  Central  States  Mission  from  1904 


to  1906,  died  May  20,  1921. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  537.) 


(See  Bio. 


326 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


BENNION,  Samuel  O.,  president  of 
the  Central  States  Mission  from  1906 
to  1933.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p. 
18.) 


Czechoslovak    Mission 

GAETH,  Arthur,  the  first  and  only 
president  of  the  Czechoslovak  Mis- 
sion prior  to  1930,  was  born  May  6, 
190.5,    in    Milwaukee,    Wisconsin,    the 


son  of  Otto  S.  Gaeth  and  Josephine 
Lindhardt.  His  parents  joined  the 
Church  when  he  was  six  years  of 
age  and  he  was  baptized  by  his  fa- 
ther on  August  27,  1913.  The  family 
moved   to   Utah   in   April,   1919. 

Elder  Gaeth  was  set  apart  on  May 
11,  1926,  by  Apostle  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay as  a  missionary  to  the  Ger- 
man-Austrian Mission,  where  he  la- 
bored for  36  months,  during  the  last 
year  as  general  superintendent  of 
auxiliary  organizations. 

On  May  19,  1929,  after  Elder  Gaeth 
had  been  released  from  the  German- 
Austrian  Mission  and  was  preparing 
to  spend  six  months  in  the  Swiss- 
German  Mission,  delivering  illus- 
trated lectures  on  Utah  and  the  Mor- 
mons,   he    was    called    by    Pi-esident 


John  A.  Widtsoe  of  the  European 
Mission  to  go  to  Prague,  Czechoslo- 
vakia, to  investigate  conditions  and 
gain  permission  for  the  opening  of 
a  mission  of  the  Church  in  that  land. 
The  investigation  proved  that  the 
time  was  ripe  for  the  inauguration 
of  the  work  of  the  Lord  in  that 
land  and  on  July  24,  1929,  President 
Widtsoe,  President  and  Sister  Hy- 
rum  W.  Valentine  and  four  mission- 
aries from  the  German-Austrian  Mis- 
sion met  in  Prague  with  Elder  Gaeth 
and  five  other  misionaries:  Elders 
Alvin  G.  Carlson,  Joseph  I.  Hart, 
Willis  H.  Hayward,  Charles  Josie, 
and  Wallace  F.  Toronto,  and  the 
thrfee  Brodil  Sisters,  members  of  the 
Church  living  in  that  city.  Together 
they  journeyed  to  the  famous  Karl- 
stejn  Castle,  built  near  Prague  in 
1348.  In  a  little  grove  in  the  sha- 
dow of  the  castle  President  Widtsoe 
dedicated  the  mission  on  July  24, 
1929,  and  set  Elder  Arthur  Gaeth 
apart  as  its  first  president.  Presi- 
dent Hyrum  W.  Valentine  ordained 
him   to   the   office   of   a   High   Priest. 

During  the  ensuing  year  the  mis- 
sionaries spent  their  time  learning 
the  new  language.  They  held  their 
first  meetings  in  English  and  at- 
tracted an  average  attendance  of 
sixty  better-class  people.  The  Elders 
gained  valuable  publicity  in  the  news- 
papers and  President  Gaeth  was  able 
to  deliver  two  German  lectures  over 
the  radio,  as  well  as  prepare  two 
others  which  were  delivered  over  the 
radio  in  Czech  by  a  friend.  His  il- 
lustrated lectures  on  Utah  and  the 
Mormons  were  in  demand  everywhere 
before  adult  education  circles  and  the 
English  clubs  in  the  country  of  which 
there  were  more  than  thirty. 

On  April  6,  1930,  on  the  100th  an- 
niversary of  the  organization  of  the 
Church,  the  Czech  missionaries  held 
their  first  conference  which  was  con- 
ducted in  the  Czech  language.  On 
this  occasion  the  Mission  distributed 
a  new  Czech  songbook  which  con- 
tained 70  songs  Avhich  had  been  trans- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


327 


lated  into  the  Czech  language.  Most 
of  the  leading  newspapers  of  the 
country  printed  accounts  of  the  cen- 
tenary celebration  of  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Church  and  Elder  Gaeth 
delivered  a  Czech  lecture  over  the 
radio  in  Prague  and  a  German  lec- 
ture over  the  radio  in  Brno  commem- 
orating the  event. 

In  the  meantime  new  missionaries 
were  sent  to  Czechoslovakia  and  the 
mission  was  organized  on  a  perma- 
nent basis.  Twenty-eight  new  ti-acts 
were  translated  and  published,  the 
Book  of  Mormon  was  translated  and 
came  off  the  press  in  February,  1933, 
and  two  booklets:  "A  Century  of 
Mormonism,"  especially  prepared  for 
the  mission  by  President  Gaeth,  and 
"What  Is  Mormonism,"  by  President 
John  A.  Widtsoe,  also  made  their  ap- 
pearance. 

In  January,  1931,  President  Gaeth 
returned  to  the  United  States,  de- 
livering lectures  about  "Czechoslo- 
vakia, the  Cradle  of  Slavonic  Liberty" 
at  Eastern  universities  and  in  Utah. 
On  March  23,  1931,  he  married  Mar- 
tha K.  Picha  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple and  in  April  he  returned  with  her 
to  Czechoslovakia  to  preside  over 
the  mission.  Together  they  made 
many  friends,  became  members  of  the 
American  Institute  of  Czechoslovakia, 
and  lectured  in  many  sections  of  the 
country.  In  1934  Sister  Gaeth  was 
one  of  the  official  delegates  of  the 
Czechoslovak  National  Council  of 
Women  at  the  international  congress 
of  Women's  oi'ganizations  in  Paris, 
France.  Pres.  Gaeth  represented  the 
Brigham  Young  University  at  the  In- 
ternational Agricultural  Congress  in 
Prague  in  1931  and  at  the  Interna- 
tional Congress  of  Philosophy  at  the 
same  place  in  1934.  President  and 
Sister  Gaeth  were  released  in  July, 
1936,  to  be  succeeded  by  President 
and  Sister  Wallace  F.  Toronto. 

From  September,  1935,  to  April, 
1936,  a  series  of  articles  "A  Mission- 
ary's Odyssey,"  by  Elder  Ai-thur  Ga- 
eth, appeared  in  the  church  section  of 


the  Deseret  News  giving  an  account 
of  his  missionary  experiences  in  Ger- 
many and  Austria  and  of  the  devel- 
opment of  the  Czechoslovak  Mission. 
Elder  Gaeth  also  visited  Hungary, 
Jugoslavia,  Roumania,  and  Russia 
and  investigated  religious  conditions 
in  those  countries.  In  1934,  under  his 
direction,  Sister  Etus  von  Haragos 
completed  the  translation  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon  in  Hungarian. 


Danish  Mission 


Presidents:  Carl  E.  Peterson,  1920- 
1923;  John  S.  Hansen,  1923-1926;  Jos- 
eph L.  Petersen,  1926-1929;  Holger 
M.  Larsen,  1929-1934. 

HANSEN,  John  S.,  president  of  the 
Danish  Mission  from  1923  to  1926, 
was  born  Sept.  6,  1877,  at  Copen- 
hagen, Denmark,  the  son  of  Soren 
Hansen  and  Christine  Andersen.     He 


was  baptized  April  5,  1889,  and  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1898.  In  1900  he 
married  Miss  Anna  C.  V.  Jensen.  Elder 
Hansen  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1912,  becoming  one  of  the  presidents 
of  the  140th  quorum  of  Seventy;  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Denmark  in  1912- 


328 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1914,  laboring  as  a  translator  and 
writer  for  "Skandinaviens  Stjerne," 
and  after  his  return  home  became 
editor  of  "Bikuben."  He  translated 
a  number  of  books,  and  for  some  time 
before  he  was  called  to  preside  over 
the  Danish  Mission  in  1923  he  acted 
as  a  counselor  to  the  Bishop  of  the 
Highland  Park  Ward.  Elder  Hansen 
died  Oct.  8,  1933,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
(See  History  of  the  Scandinavian 
Mission,  p.  488.) 

LARSEN,  Holger  M.,  president  of 
the  Danish  Mission  from  1929  to  1934, 
was  born  Nov.  4, 
1888,  in  Copen- 
hagen, Denmark, 
the  son  of  Niels 
Larsen  and  Ida 
Camilla  Bolle.  He 
was  baptized  Oct. 
20,  1897,  and  later 
emigrated  to  Utah. 
Elder  Larsen  filled 
his  first  mission  to 
Denmark  in  1909- 
1911.  On  his  second 
mission  he  was  join- 
ed by  his  wife,  Ra- 
chel S.  Larsen,  in  the  fall  of  1930.  She 
was  born  May  1, 1894,  at  Soda  Springs, 
Idaho,  a  daughter  of  Ludwig  Suhi'ke 
and  Susan  Bossart.  Their  home  is  in 
Logan,  Cache   Co.,  Utah. 

PETERSON,  Carl  Edwin,  president 
of  the  Danish-Norwegian  Mission 
from  1919  to  1920  and  president  of 
the  Danish  Mission  from  1920  to 
1923,  was  born  July  2,  1853,  in  Dais- 
land,  Sweden,  his  parents  being  Peter 
J.  and  Christine  Johanson.  He  was 
baptized  March  23,  1873,  emigrated 
to  Utah  and  resided  for  many  years 
in  Ogden,  Weber  County.  Elder  Pe- 
terson filled  his  first  mission  to  Swe- 
den in  1888-1890.  After  returning 
from  his  last  mission  he  removed  to 
California,  where  he  died. 

PETERSEN,  Joseph  L.,  president 
of    the    Danish    Mission    from    1926 


to  1929,  was  born  in  Huntsville,  We- 
ber Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Soren  L.  and 
Louisa  Petersen.     Elder  Petersen  has 


spent  most  of  his  life  in  Huntsville, 
where  he  is  engaged  in  mercantile 
business.  In  1902  he  married  Miss 
Ida  A.  Anderson.  He  has  filled  three 
missions  to  Denmark,  the  first  in 
1897-1899,  the  second  in  1904-1906, 
and  the  third  in  1926-1929,  when  he 
was  called  to  preside  over  the  Danish 
Mission.  He  also  served  as  Bishop 
of  the  Huntsville  Ward  in  1916-1926. 
(See  History  of  the  Scandinavian 
Mission,  p.  492.) 


Danish-Norwegian  Mission 

Presidents:  Jens  M.  Christensen, 
1905-1907;  Soren  Rasmussen,  1907- 
1909;  Andrew  Jenson,  1909-1912; 
Martin  Christoffersen,  1912-1914; 
Hans  J.  Christiansen,  1914-1919;  Carl 
E.  Peterson,  1919-1920. 

CHRISTENSEN  (James  Miller) 
Jens  Moller,  president  of  the  Danish- 
Norwegian  Mission  from  1905  to  1907, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


329 


died  Jan,  7,  1915,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Mission  from  1914  to  1919,  died  May 
Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  686  27,  1923,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
and  History  of  the  Scandinavian  Mis-  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  201,  and 
sion,  p.  411.)  History    of    the     Scandinavian    Mis- 

sion, p.  438.) 

JENSON,  Andrew,  president  of  the 
Danish-Norwegian  Mission  from 
1909  to  1912.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  752;  also  History  of  the  Scandi- 
navian Mission,  p.  215.) 


I : — 

JH^^^ 

1 

* 

l%V^ 

1 

# 

CHRISTIANSEN,       Hans       Jacob, 

president    of    the    Danish-Norwegian 


CHRISTOFFERSEN,  Martin,  pres- 
ident of  the  Danish-Norwegian  Mis- 
sion   from    1912    to    1914,    died    Aug. 


330 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


24,  1927,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  617,  and 
History  of  the  Scandinavian  Mission, 
p.  434.) 

RASMUSSEN,  Soren,  president  of 
the  Danish-Norwegian  Mission  from 
1907  to   1909.      (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 


1,  p.  574  and  Vol.  3,  p.  495;  also  His- 
tory of  the  Scandinavian  Mission,  p. 
418.) 


East  Central  States  Mission 

(Organized  in  part  Nov.  26,  1928, 
commenced  to  function  in  January, 
1929.  Miles  L.  Jones  was  the  first 
president.) 

JONES,  Miles  L.,  president  of  the 
East  Central  States  Mission  from 
1928  to  1934,  was  born  Oct.  31,  1866, 
in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of  Miles  H. 
Jones  and  Ann  Rollins.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  30,  1888,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1905-1909, 
and  was  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
East  Central  States  Mission  Dec.  6, 
1928;  he  returaed  June  22, 1934.  Prior 
to  this  he  filled  a  short-term  mission 
to  California  in  1925-1926. 


Eastern  States  Mission 

Presidents:  John  P.  Greene,  1839- 
1843;  Lyman  Wight,  1843-1844;  Wil- 
liam Smith,  in  1844;  Parley  P.  Pratt, 
1844-1845;  Orson  Pratt,  August-No- 
vember, 1845;  Samuel  Brannan,  No- 
vember, 1845-February,  1846;  Jesse 
C.  Little,  1846-1847;  William  L  Ap- 
pleby, pro  tem.,  March,  1847-Nov., 
1847;  Jesse  C.  Little  (second  term), 
November,  1847-1848;  Wilford  Wood- 
ruff, 1848-1850;  John  Taylor,  1854- 
1857;  William  I.  Appleby  (second 
term),  1857-1858;  (Utah  Elders  were 
called  home  on  account  of  the  John- 
ston Army  troubles  in  1857);  Wil- 
liam H.  Miles,  1865-1869.  (From 
1889  to  1893  New  York  and  other 
States  belonged  to  Northern  States 
Mission.  The  Eastern  States  Mis- 
sion was  reopened  in  1893,  since 
which  the  following  Elders  have  acted 
as  presidents:  Job  Pingree,  1893- 
1895;  Samuel  W.  Richards,  1895- 
1897;'  Alonzo  P.  Kesler,  1897-1899; 
William  H.  Smart,  1899-1900;  Ed- 
ward H.  Snow,  1900-1901;  John  G. 
McQuarrie,  1901-1908;  Benjamin  E. 
Rich,  1908-1913;  Walter  P.  Monson, 
October,  1913-1919;  George  W.  Mc- 
Cune,  1919-1922;  Brigham  H.  Rob- 
erts, 1922-1927;  Henry  H.  Rolapp, 
1927-1928;  James  H.  Moyle,  1928- 
1933. 

APPLEBY,  William  L,  president 
pro  tem.  of  the  Eastern  States 
Mission  in  1847,  and  president  from 
1857  to  1858,  was  born  Aug.  13,  1811, 
near  New  Egypt,  Mammoth  Co., 
New  Jersey,  the  son  of  Jacob  Ap- 
pleby and  Mary  Sutress.  Having 
heard  Elder  Orson  Pratt  preach  the 
Gospel,  he  became  a  convert  and  was 
baptized  Sept.  21,  1840,  by  Erastus 
Snow.  In  1841  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  sent  out  as  a  missionary 
to  labor  in  New  Jersey,  Delaware  and 
Pennsylvania,  raising  up  a  branch  at 
Ricklestown,  N.  J.  On  Sept.  1,  1844, 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
in  1845  was  appointed  to  preside  over 
the    branches    in    Pennsylvania     and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


331 


Delaware.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1849, 
filled  another  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1856-1858,  acting  as  pres- 
ident from  1857  to  1858,  part  of  the 
time  assisting  Elder  John  Taylor  in 
editing  the  "Mormon".  Elder  Ap- 
pleby died  May  20,  1870. 

BRANNAN,  Samuel,  president  of 
the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1845 
to  1846.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p. 
606.) 

GREENE,  John  .P.,  president  of  the 
Eastern  States  Mission  from  1839 
to  1843.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p. 
633.) 

KESLER,  Alonzo  P.,  president  of 
the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1897 
to  1899,  was  born  Jan.  29,  1868,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Frederick  Kesler  and  Jane  Elizabeth 
Pratt.  He  was  baptized  in  February, 
1876,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain in  1894-1896,  and  became  inti- 
mately acquainted  with  Canon  Farr- 
er.  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  He 
married  Donnette  Smith,  daughter 
of  Pi'es.  Jos.  F.  Smith,  and  six  chil- 
dren were  born  to  them.  For  thir- 
teen years  he  acted  as  assistant  post- 
master of  Salt  Lake  City.  Elder 
Kesler  fell  from  a  scaffold  and  was 
accidentally  killed  Feb.  4,  1918,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

McCUNE,  George  W.,  president  of 
the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1919 
to  1922,  was  born  May  24,  1873,  in 
Nephi,  Utah,  the  son  of  Henry  F. 
McCune  and  Elizabeth  Grace.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1896-1898,  and  was  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Eastern  States  Mission 
April  24,  1919.  He  returned  to  Utah 
July  11,  1922. 

McQUARRIE,  John  G.,  president 
of  the  Eastern  States  Mission  from 
1901  to  1908,  was  born  Oct.  10,  1869, 
in    Spanish    Fork,    Utah,   the    son    of 


Hector  McQuarrie  and  Agnes  Gray. 
He  was  baptized  April  5,  1868,  and 
was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  Aug.  8,  1900,  and  be- 
came president  of  the  same  March 
8,  1901.  He  acted  until  Aug.  8, 
1908,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Ben 
E.  Rich. 

LITTLE,  Jesse  C,  president  of  the 
Eastei'n  States  Mission  from   1846  to 


1847.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  242, 
also  Vol.  3,  p.  151.) 

MILES,  William  Hart,  president  of 
the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1865 
to  1868,  was  born  July  8,  1810,  in 
Southampton,  Bucks  Co.,  Penn.,  a  son 
of  William  Miles  and  Rebecca  Hart. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  17,  1839,  by 
Benjamin  Winchester,  in  Philadel- 
phia. About  the  year  1841,  he  was 
appointed  by  Pai-ley  P.  Pratt  to  pre- 
side over  the  Brooklyn  Branch.  Sub- 
sequently, he  was  appointed  by  Wm. 
Smith  to  preside  over  the  New  York 
Branch,  and  was  also  ordained  a  High 
Priest.  In  1861  he  came  west  with 
Orson,  Pratt  to  Council  Bluffs,  and 
crossed  the  plains  in  Capt.  Tanner's 
mule  train,  having  left  his  family 
in  New  York.  In  the  spring  of 
1862  he  was  sent  back  to  preside 
over  the  New  York   Conference,  but 


332 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


took  sick  and  returned  to  Utah  in 
1866.  He,  however,  returned  to  the 
States  in  the  spring  of  1867,  and  pre- 
sided over  the  Eastern  States  Mis- 
sion until  1869,  when  he  returned 
to  Utah.    He  died  Jan.  14,  1896. 

MONSON,  Walter  P.,  president  of 
the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1913 
to  1919,  died  Feb.  12,  1935.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  175.) 


MOYLE,  James  H.,  president  of  the 
Eastern  States  Mision  from  1928  to 
1933.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  783.) 


PINGREE,  Job,  president  of  the 
Eastern  States  Mission  from  1893 
to  1895,  was  born  Nov.  21,  1837, 
in  Acton,  Beauchamp,  Worcestershire, 
England,  the  son  of  Job  Pingree  and 
Charlotte  Fairant.  He  was  baptized 
in  August,  1856.  He  was  set  apart 
for  his  mission  Jan.  6,  1893,  and  re- 
turned Dec.  31,  1894. 

PRATT,  Orson,  president  of  the 
Eastern  States  Mission  from  1845 
to   1845.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol,  1,  p. 

87.) 

PRATT,  Parley  P.,  president  of 
the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1844 
to  1845.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  83.) 

RICH,  Ben  E.,  president  of  the 
Eastern  States  Mission  from  1908  to 
1913.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  206.) 


RICHARDS,  Samuel  W.,  president 
of  the  Eastern  States  Mission  from 
1895  to  1897.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  718.) 

SMITH,  William,  president  of  the 
Eastern  States  Mission  in  1844.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  86.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA  333 

ROBERTS,    Brigham   H.,   president  SMART,   William   H.,   president  of 

of  the   Eastern   States   Mission  from  the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1899 

1922  to   1927,  died  Sept.  27,  1933,  in  to   1900.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.   1,  p. 

Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.   (See  Bio.  Ency.,  360.) 
Vol.  1,  p.  205.) 


ROLAPP,    Henry    H.,    president   of 
the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1927  SNOW,    Edward    H.,    president    of 

to    1928,    died    Jan.    8,    1936,    in    Los       the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1900 


to  1901,  died  July  18,  1932.     (See  Bio. 
Angeles,  Calif.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.      Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  798.) 
3,  p.  501.) 

TAYLOR,    John,    president    of    the  WIGHT,    Lyman,   president   of   the 

Eastern    States    Mission    from    1854      Eastern  States  Mission  from  1843  to 
to  1857.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  14.)      1844.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  93.) 


334 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


WOODRUFF,  Wilford,  president  of 
the  Eastern  States  Mission  from  1848 


to   1850. 
20.) 


(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 


Rulon  Christensen,  1928-1929;  Golden 
L.   Woolf,  1929-1933. 

BARNES,  Mark,  president  of  the 
French  Mission  from  1858  to  1859, 
was  an  Elder  from  England  who  was 
recommended  by  Edward  Bunker  July 
10,  1855,  to  serve  as  president  of  the 
French  Mission.  Elder  Bunker  said 
of  Mark  Barnes  that  he  was  a 
good,  faithful  Elder,  who  had  been 
in  the  missionary  field  a  long  time. 
He  accompanied  William  Budge  to 
the  Isle  of  Jersey  June  9,  1858,  to 
act  as  president.  On  Jan,  1,  1859, 
he  reported  the  French  Mission  at  a 
conference  held  in  Birmingham,  Eng- 
land, and  on  Jan,  22,  1859,  according 
to  the  "Millennial  Star,"  he  was  con- 
tinued as  px-esident  of  the  French 
Mission.  After  acting  as  pi-esident 
of  the  Dorsetshire  Conference  in  Eng- 
land from  Aug.  10,  1861,  he  sailed 
from  Liverpool  May  6,  1862,  as  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Pres.  John  D.  T. 
McAllister  in  charge  of  a  company 
of  Saints.  The  company  landed  in 
New  York  June  12,  1862. 


European  Mission 

The  European  Mission  had  its  be- 
ginning in  1852.  Since  that  date  the 
presidents  of  the  European  Mission 
have  had  jurisdiction  over  all  the  Lat- 
ter-day Saint  missions  in  Europe, 
Asia   (Japan  excepted)   and  Africa. 


French  Mission 


Presidents:  John  Taylor,  1850- 
1851;  Curtis  E.  Bolton,  1851-1853; 
Andrew  L,  Lamoreaux,  1853-1854; 
William  C.  Dunbar,  1854-1856;  Geo. 
L.  Keaton,  1856-1858;  Mark  Barnes, 
1858-1859;  Louis  A.  Bertrand,  1859- 
1864.  (From  1864  to  1913  the  few 
members  in  France  and  on  the  Jersey 
Islands  constituted  a  part  of  the  Brit- 
ish Mission.)  Edgar  B.  Brossard, 
1913-1914;  Benjamin  F.  Howells,  in 
1914;  Russell  H.  Blood,  1924-1925; 
Ernest  C.  Rossiter,  1925-1928;   Peter 


BERTRAND,  Louis  Alphonso,  pres- 
ident of  the  French  Mission  from 
1859  to  1864,  was  born  Jan.  8,  1808, 
in  Roguevaire,  Bouches  de  Rhone, 
France,  a  son  of  Joseph  Bertrand  and 
Mary  Flandin.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  1, 
1850,  by  John  Taylor,  in  the  River 
Seine;  came  to  Utah  in  1855,  but  re- 
turned to  France  as  a  missionary  in 
1859  to  take  charge  of  the  French 
Mission.  Many  conversions  were 
made  in  Switzerland  and  Belgium 
as  well  as  in  France.  Brother  Ber- 
trand's  wife  and  their  two  sons  re- 
mained in  Paris.  He  never  married 
again,  but  remained  faithful  to  his 
wife,  until  he  died  March  21,  1875. 

BOLTON,  Curtis  E.,  president  of 
the  French  Mission  from  1851  to  1853, 
was  born  July  10,  1812,  in  Philadel- 
phia, Penn.,  a  son  of  Curtis  and  Ann 
Bolton.  It  is  not  known  when  he 
became  a  member  of  the  Church,  but 
on  Sept.  4,  1842,  he  was  ordained  an 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


335 


Elder  at  Little  Falls,  New  Jersey,  and 
became  a  member  of  a  branch  of  the 
Church  which  was  organized  by  El- 
der John  Leach.  Later,  he  lived  in 
Nauvoo  where  he  took  an  active  part 
in  protecting  the  Temple  from  being 
damaged  by  the  mob  in  February, 
1846.  Bro.  Bolton  probably  came  to 
the  Valley  in  1848,  as  he  was  called 
in  October,  1849,  to  accompany  John 
Taylor  on  a  mission  to  France,  arriv- 
ing in  England  May  27,  1850.  He 
translated  articles  for  newspapers, 
and  later,  assisted  by  native  converts 
from  the  Channel  Islands,  he  trans- 
lated the  Book  of  Mormon  into 
French,  and  published  a  magazine 
called  "L'Etoile  du  Deseret".  He  re- 
turned to  Utah  in  1853,  and  died  Dec. 
6,  1890,  in  Marysville,  Piute  Co., 
Utah,  aged  80  years. 

BLOOD,  Russell  Henry,  president  of 
the  French  Mission  from  1924  to 
1926,  was  born  Oct.  27,  1900,  at 
Kaysville,  Utah,  a  son  of  Henry  H. 
Blood  and  Minnie  A.  Barnes.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  27,  1908,  was  set 
apart  Nov.  10,  1921,  for  the  British 
Mission,  was  appointed  president  of 
the  French  Mission  Dec.  27,  1923,  and 
acted  in  that  capacity  until  his  re- 
lease in  July,  1925. 

DUNBAR,  William  C,  president 
of  the  French  Mission  from  1854 
to  1856,  was  born  Oct.  26,  1822,  in 
Inverness,  Scotland,  a  son  of  James 
and  Ann  Dunbar.  He  was  baptized 
Dec.  28,  1840,  and  labored  in  Eng- 
land as  a  missionary  in  1846-1852. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1852.  He 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  called  to 
England  to  fill  a  mission,  was  ap- 
pointed president  of  the  French  Mis- 
sion Dec.  2,  1854,  and  was  released 
Dec.  8,  1855.  Bro.  Dunbar  was  a  fam- 
ous comedian,  vocalist,  and  bagpipe 
performer  of  the  early  days  of  Salt 
Lake  City;  he  was  also  one  of  the 
founders  of  the  "Salt  Lake  Herald." 
Elder  Dunbar  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
June  8,  1905. 


BROSSARD,  Edgar  Bernard,  pres- 
ident of  the  French  Mission  from 
1913  to  1914,  was  born  April  1,  1889, 
at  Oxford,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Alphonse 
Brossai-d  and  Mary  Catherine  Hobson. 
He  was  baptized   May  31,   1901,  was 


set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Switzerland 
and  Germany  Oct.  2,  1911,  was  sus- 
tained as  president  of  the  French 
Mission  Oct.  15,  1912,  and  acted  in 
that  capacity  till  May  7,  1914,  when 
he  was  succeeded  by  Benjamin  F. 
Howells. 

CHRISTENSEN,  Peter  Rulon,  pres- 
ident of  the  French  Mission  from 
1928  to  1929,  was  born  Dec.  29,  1901, 
in  Ephraim,  Utah,  a  son  of  Hans 
Christensen  and  Elizabeth  A. 
Thomson.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  8, 
1910,  was  set  apart  for  a  mission 
to  France  June  22,  1926,  became  pres- 
ident of  the  French  Mission  Sept.  20, 
1928,  upon  the  departure  of  Pres. 
Ernest  C.  Rossiter  and  wife  for  their 
home    in    Utah.      Elder    Christensen 


336 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


was  released  Jan.   1,  1930,  but  soon  presided  until  Sept.  1,  1928,  when  he 

after    his     return    to    his    home     in  was    succeeded    by    P.    Rulon    Chris- 

Ephraim  he  took  sick  and  died  Sept.  tensen.        During      Elder      Rossiter's 
6,  1930. 


HOWELLS,       Benjamin       Francis, 

president  of  the  French  Mission  in 
1914,  was  born  March  5,  1888,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thom- 
as F.  Howells  and  Mai-y  Parrish. 
He  was  baptized  in  March,  1896, 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Switzer- 
land and  Germany  July  22,  1912,  and 
was  made  president  of  the  French 
Mission  May  7,  1914.  When  war 
was  declared  in  August  of  that  year 
he  and  most  of  the  American  mis 
sionaries  were  released  to  ret' 
home. 

K  EATON,     George     Dennis,     jun., 

president  of  the  French  Mission  from 
1856  to  1858,  was  born  June  27, 
1828,  in  Buckleberry,  Berkshire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  George  Dennis  and 
Mary  Jane  Keaton.  He  was  ap- 
pointed to  fill  a  mission  in  Italy 
Dec.  11,  1852,  from  England,  and 
labored  in  that  mission  till  June, 
1854.  On  Dec.  8,  1855,  he  was  ap- 
pointed president  of  the  French  Mis- 
sion, and  as  late  as  July,  1858,  was 
still  acting  as  president  of  that  mis- 
sion. 

ROSSITER,  Ernest  Crabtree,  pres- 
ident of  the  French  Mission  from 
1925  to  1928,  was  born  Oct.  16,  1882, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
William  A.  Rossiter  and  Eliza  Crab- 
tree.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  4,  1890, 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  10,  1905, 
by  Seymour  B.  Young  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Europe,  laboring  in  the  Bel- 
gian part  of  the  Netherlands  Mission. 
Immediately  afterwards  (1907-1909) 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States.  In  1915  he  was  called  to  pre- 
side over  the  Society  Islands  Mission, 
which  position  he  held  until  1919. 
He  was  set  apart  July  28,  1925,  to 
preside  over  the  French  Mission,  and 


ministry  good  progress  was  made  in 
France.  After  being  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Charles  A.  Callis  he  was 
chosen  as  a  member  of  the  High  Coun- 
cil in  the  Salt  Lake  Stake.  Since  May, 
1929,  he  has  served  as  manager  of  the 
Temple  Square  Hotel. 

TAYLOR,  John,  president  of  the 
French  Mission  from  1850  to  1851. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  14.) 

WOOLF,  Golden  LeGrande,  presi- 
dent of  the  French  Mission  from  1929 
to  1933,  was  born  Dec.  13,  1891,  in 
Millville,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Martin  Woolf,  sen.,  and  Roseltha 
Hyde.  He  was  baptized  May  5,  1900, 
was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  March  21, 
1911,  and  returned  to  his  home  in  Al- 
berta, Canada,  Jan.  1,  1914.  He  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  French  Mis- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


337 


sion  Dec.  4,  1929,  when  Pres.  P.  Rulon 
Christensen  was  released.  His  wife, 
Fanny  E.  Coombs  Woolf,  accompanied 
him.  She  was  born  June  6,  1893,  at 
Nephi,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Mark  A. 
Coombs  and  Henrietta  McCune.  After 
this  mission,  they  made  their  home  in 
Provo,  Utah.  Elder  Coombs  is  princi- 
pal of  the  Brigham  Young  College 
high  school. 


German  Mission 

Presidents:  George  P.  Dykes,  1851- 
1854;  George  C.  Riser,  1854-1855; 
(The  German  Mission  constituted  a 
part  of  the  Swiss  and  German  Mis- 
sion during  the  years  1855-1897,  in- 
clusive); Peter  Loutensock,  1897-1899; 
Arnold  H.  Schulthess,  1899-1901; 
Hugh  J.  Cannon,  1901-1904.  The  Ger- 
man Mission  was  made  a  part  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission,  May  22, 
1904. 


Charles  P.  Loutensock  and  Maria  K. 
Holz.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  31,  1874, 
ordained  an  Elder  in  February,  1875, 
by  Henry  Eyring  and  presided  over 
the  Mannheim  Branch  until  June  9th 
of  that  year,  when  he  emigrated  to 
Zion.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Minne- 
sota, U.  S.,  in  1883-1884;  acted  as 
president  of  the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in 
Lehi  and  later  at  Eureka,  Utah,  and 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Eureka  Ward 
in  1894-1896.  He  was  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Germany  July  17,  1896, 
by  Geo.  Teasdale,  and  arrived  in  Bern, 
Switzerland,  Aug.  24,  of  the  same 
year.  After  laboring  a  while  in  the 
missionary  field  he  was  called  in  Octo- 
ber to  Bern  to  help  in  the  mission 
office,  which  he  did  until  Jan.  1,  1897, 
when  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  the 


SCHULTHESS,    Arnold    H.,    presi- 
dent   of    the    German    Mission    from 


DYKES,  George  P.,  president  of  the 
German  Mission  from  1851  to  1854. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  762.) 


LOUTENSOCK,  Peter,  president  of 
the  German  Mission  from  1897  to 
1899,  was  born  Jan.  31,  1848,  in  Wat- 
tenheim,    Rhein,    Bavaria,    a    son    of 


1899  to  1901,  died  July  7,  1924, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  598.) 

RISER,  George  Christian,  president 
of  the  German  Mission  from  1854  to 
1855,  was  born  July  16,  1818,  at  Korn- 
westhime,  Wurtemburg,  Germany,  a 
son  of  Chi'istopher  Casper  Riser  and 


Vol.  IV.  No.  22 


May  30,  1936 


338 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Barbara  HoflFman.  He  emigrated  to 
America  in  the  spring  of  1831,  was 
baptized  Dec.  12,  1842,  in  the  Mis- 
sissippi River  by  Elder  Albert  Brown, 
and  went  to  Utah  in  1846.  He  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Europe  in  1852, 
arriving  in  Livei'pool,  England,  Jan. 
3,  1853.  After  visiting  some  of  the 
branches  in  England,  he  went  to 
Hamburg,  Germany,  and  was  appoint- 
ed president  of  the  German  Mission 
Jan.  21,  1854.  He  was  arrested  and 
imprisoned  for  preaching  the  Gospel 
Aug.  13,  1854,  and  not  being  allowed 
to  continue  his  labors,  he  was  released 
to  return  home,  and  reached  the  Val- 
ley Sept.  11,  1855.  Elder  Riser  died 
Jan.  24,  1892,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 


German-Austrian   Mission 

(Established  in  1925) 
Presidents:     Fred  Tadje,  1925-1926; 
Hyrum  W.  Valentine,  1926-1929;  Ed- 
ward P.  Kimball,  1929-1930;  Oliver  H 
Budge,  1930-1934. 

KIMBALL,  Edward  P.,  president  of 
the    German-Austrian    Mission    from 


BUDGE,  Oliver  H.,  president  of  the 
German-Austrian  Mission  from  1930  to 
1934,  was  born  April  3,  1873,  a  son  of 
Wm.  Budge  and  Ann  Hyer.  He  was 
baptized  when  nine  yeai's  old  by  Robert 
Price,  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  7,  1896, 
by  Chr.  D.  Fjeldsted,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Switzerland  and  Germany  in 
1896-1899.  On  his  second  mission 
(1930-1934),  when  he  presided,  he  was 
accompanied  by  his  wife,  Margaret 
Sutton  Budge,  who  was  born  April  15, 
1877,  in  Paris,  Idaho,  a  daughter  of 
John  A.  Sutton  and  Margaret  H.  Shep- 
herd. 

TADJE,  Fred.,  president  of  the  Ger- 
man-Austrian Mission  from  1925  to 
1926.    (See  page  388.) 

VALENTINE,  Hyrum  W..  president 
of  the  German-Austrian  Mission  from 
1926  to  1929.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  731.) 


1929  to  1930.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4, 
p.  216.) 


Hawaiian  Mission 

Presidents:  Hiram  Clark,  1850- 
1851;  Philip  B.  Lewis,  1851-1855;  Si- 
las Smith,  1855-1857;  Henry  W.  Big- 
ler,  1857-1858;  Native  Elders,  1858- 
1861;     Walter     M.     Gibson     (without 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


339 


proper  appointment),  1861-1864;  Ezra 
T.  Benson  and  Lorenzo  Snow  (in  tem- 
porary charge  for  re-organizing  pur- 
poses), March,  1864-April,  1864;  Jo- 
seph F.  Smith,  April-July,  1864;  Alma 
L.  Smith,  1864-1865;  George  Nebeker, 
1865-1873;  Fred  A.  H.  F.  Mitchell, 
1873-1875;  Alma  L.  Smith  (second 
term),  1875-1876;  Ward  E.  Pack,  1876- 
1878;  Simpson  M.  Molen,  1878-1879; 
Harvey  H.  Cluff,  1879-1882;  Edward 
Partridge,  1882-1885;  Enoch  Farr, 
1885-1887;  William  King,  1887-1890; 
Ward  E.  Pack  (second  term),  1890- 
1892;  Matthew  Noall,  1892-1895;  Sam- 
uel E.  Woolley,  1895-1919;  E.  Wesley 
Smith,  1919-1922;  Eugene  J.  Neff, 
1922-1926;  William  Mark  Waddoups. 
1926-1930. 

BENSON,  Ezra  T.,  president  of  the 
Hawaiian  Mission  pro  tem.  in  1864, 
died  Sept.  3,  1869,  in  Ogden,  Utah. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  99.) 

BIGLER,  Henry  W.,  president  (pro 
tem.)  of  the  Hawaiian  Mission  from 
1857  to  1858.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
3,  p.  599.) 

CLARK,  Hiram,  first  president  of 
the  Hawaiian  Mission  from  1850  to 
1851,  was  born  Sept.  22,  1795,  in  Wells, 
Rutland  Co.,  Vermont,  a  son,  of  Lu- 
man  and  Permelia  Clark.  After  being 
baptized  into  the  Church  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  in  January,  1847, 
and  was  called  to  fill  a  mission  in  Cal- 
ifornia in  1850.  At  a  meeting  pre- 
sided over  by  Charles  C.  Rich  held 
on  the  banks  of  the  Sacramento  River, 
Calif.,  Sept.  25,  1850,  Elder  Clark,  who 
had  previously  filled  two  missions  to 
Great  Britain,  was  appointed  to  pre- 
side over  the  Hawaiian  Mission,  and 
he  with  others  left  a  California  min- 
ing camp  Oct.  18,  1850,  for  San  Fran- 
cisco, where  they  embarked  on  the 
ship  "Imaum"  Nov.  22,  1850,  and  ar- 
rived in  Honolulu  Dec.  12,  1850.  El- 
der Clark's  presidency  was  not  a  suc- 
cess. He  died  Dec.  28,  in  San  Bernar- 
dino, Calif.,  in  1853. 


CLUFF,    Harvey    H.,    president   of 
the   Hawaiian   Mission   from    1879   to 


1882,  died  April   19,   1916. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  371.) 


(See  Bio. 


FARR,  Enoch,  president  of  the  Ha- 
waiian Mission  from  1885  to  1887,  was 
born  Dec.  28,  1845,  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  a 
son  of  Lorin  Farr  and  Nancy  B.  Chase. 
He  was  baptized  in  1854,  after  com- 
ing to  Utah  with  his  parents  in  1847. 
Being  called  and  set  apai't  Oct.  13, 
1884,  for  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands,  he  arrived  in  Honolulu  Nov. 
8,  1884,  and  succeeded  Elder  Edward 
Partridge  as  president  of  the  Ha- 
waiian Mission.  He  returned  to  Utah 
May  30,  1887,  and  died  June  30,  1914. 

GIBSON,  Walter  Murray,  a  self- 
appointed  president  of  the  Hawaiian 
Mission  who  functioned  from  1861  to 
1864,  was  born  Jan.  16,  1822,  at  sea, 
between  Gibraltar  and  England,  a 
son  of  John  Gibson  and  Lucy  Mur- 
raJ^  He  was  baptized  Jan.  15,  1860, 
filled  a  short  mission  to  the  United 
States  from  April  to  November,  1860, 
and  arrived  in  Honolulu,  Hawaii,  June 
30,  1861.  Soon  after  his  arrival  he 
claimed  to  be  the  president  of  the 
mission.  Because  of  his  desire  to 
"set  up  a  kingdom"  of  his  own  on  the 
islands  he  was  excommunicated  fi'om 


340 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


the   Church   in   April,   1864.     He  died      wife  and  five  children  with  him.    He 


Jan.  21,  1888,  in  San  Francisco,  Cali- 
fornia. 

LEWIS,  Philip  B.,  president  of  the 
Hawaiian  Mission  from  1851  to  1855, 
died  Nov.  13,  1879.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  3,  p.  672.) 

KING,  William,  president  of  the 
Hawaiian  Mission  from  1887  to  1890, 
was  born  April  8,  1834,  in  Cicero, 
Onondaga  Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Thom- 
as R.  King  and  Matilda  Robison.  He 
was  baptized  in  1843,  came  to  Utah 
at  an  early  day,  and  was  identified 
with  some  of  the  foremost  interests 
of  the  Territory.  Twelve  years  of 
his  life  were  spent  in  missionary  la- 
bors among  the  natives  of  the  Sand- 
wich Islands.  He  also  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  United  States.  He  was 
set  apart  for  his  mission  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands  Oct.  18,  1886,  and  being 
made  president  April  6,  1887,  he  act- 
ed in  that  capacity  until  Nov.  13,  1889. 
He  sailed  from  Honolulu  May  9,  1890, 
for  his  home  in  Utah,  accompanied 
by  his  wife. 

MITCHELL,    Frederick    A.    H.    F., 

president  of  the  Hawaiian  Mission 
from  1873  to  1875,  was  born  July  14, 
1835,  in  Sheffield,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  Hezekiah  Mitchell  and 
Sarah  Mallinson.  He  was  baptized 
in  July,  1845,  emigrated  to  St.  Louis, 
Mo.,  in  1849,  and  arrived  in  Utah  in 
1854.  He  married  Margaret  Thomp- 
son on  Nov.  15,  1855,  who  bore  him 
twelve  children.  In  the  spring  of 
1856,  he  was  called  to  labor  in  the 
Sandwich  Islands.  He  walked  all  the 
way  to  California,  driving  stock  as 
far  as  Carson  Valley,  in  order  to  earn 
his  supplies.  He  returned  in  1858, 
and  in  1868  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Edwin  D.  Wool- 
ley  of  the  13th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  acted  thus  until  May,  1873,  when 
he  was  again  called  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands   as   a   missionary,   taking   his 


acted  as  president  of  the  Mission  un- 
til Feb.  2,  1875.  Elder  Mitchell  died 
July  26,  1923. 

MOLEN,  Simpson  M.,  president  of 
the    Hawaiian    Mission   from    1878   to 


1879,   died   Nov.   29,    1900.    (See    Bio. 
«ncy.,  Vol.  1,  p.  408.) 

NEBEKER,  George,  president  of 
the  Hawaiian  Mission  from  1865  to 
1873,  died  Dec.  1,  1886.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  682.) 

NEFF,  Eugene  Jefferson,  president 
of  the  Hawaiian  Mission  from  1922 
to  1926,  was  born  March  29,  1883,  in 
East  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  a  son  of  Amos 
Herr  Neff  and  Eliza  Anne  Hughes.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  1,  1892,  filled  a 
mission  to  Hawaii  in  1904-1908,  and 
was  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Ha- 
waiian Mission  Feb.  2,  1923. 

NOALL,  Matthew,  pi-esident  of  the 
Hawaiian  Mission  from  1892  to  1895, 
was  born  Feb.  1,  1864,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Simon  Noall  and 
Rebecca  Squire.  He  was  baptized 
June  6,  1872,  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1884,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands  in  1885-1889.  He  left 
Salt  Lake   City  Nov.   17,   1891,  on  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


341 


second  mission  to  preside  over  the 
Hawaiian  Mission;  he  arrived  in  Hon- 
olulu Dec.  18,  1891,  and  returned 
Nov.  4,  1895. 

PACK,  Ward  Eaton,  president  of 
the  Hawaiian  Mission  from  1876  to 
1878,  was  born  April  17,  1834,  in 
Jefferson  County,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  John 
Pack  and  Julia  Ives.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  17,  1842,  set  apart  April 
10,  1876,  arrived  in  Honolulu  June 
1,  1876,  and  upon  the  departure  of 
Elder  Alma  L.  Smith,  June  2,  1876, 
assumed  the  presidency  of  the  Mis- 
sion. He  returned  to  Utah  April  1, 
1878.  Elder  Pack  died  Nov.  16,  1907, 
at  Vernal,  Utah. 

PARTRIDGE,  Edward,  jun.,  presi- 
dent   of   the    Hawaiian    Mission    from 


1882  to  1885,  died  Nov.  17,  1900.    (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  488.) 

SMITH,  Alma  Lamoni,  president 
of  the  Hawaiian  Mission  from  1864 
to  1865,  and  from  1874  to  1875,  was 
born  Dec.  16,  1831,  in  Amherst,  Lo- 
rain Co.,  Ohio,  a  son  of  Warren  Smith 
and  Amanda  Barnes,  He  was  bap- 
tized in  July,  1841,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1850,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Sand- 
wich Islands  in  1856-1858,  a  second 
mission  in  1864,  acting  as  president 


from  Oct.  2,  1864,  to  Oct.  7,  1865.  He 
returned  May  9,  1868,  after  perform- 
ing a  successful  mission.  Elder  Smith 
presided  over  the  Mission  a  second 
time  from  Sept.  21,  1874,  to  Dec.  31, 
1875,  returning  to  his  home  in  Utah, 
July  3,  1876. 

SMITH,  Elias  Wesley,  president  of 
the  Hawaiian  Mission  from  1919  to 
1922,  was  born  April  21,  1886,  in  Laie, 
Oahu,  Hawaiian  Islands,  a  son  of 
Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith  and  Julina  Lamb- 
son.  He  was  baptized  April  21,  1894, 
ordained  an  Elder  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Hawaiian  Islands  in  1907-1910. 
Being  called  on  a  second  mission  to 
Hawaii,  he  was  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Hawaiian  Mission  May  8, 
1919,  and  acted  in  that  capacity  until 
his  return. 

SMITH,  Joseph  F.,  president  of  the 
Hawaiian  Mission  for  a  short  time  in 
1864,  died  Nov.  19,  1918.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  66.) 

SNOW,  Lorenzo,  president  of  the 
Hawaiian  mission  for  a  short  time  in 


1864,  died  Oct.   10,  1901. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  26.) 


SMITH,  Silas,  president  of  the  Ha- 
waiian Mission  from  1855  to  1857,  was 
born  June  6,  1822,  in  Stockholm,  St. 
Lawrence  Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Asahel 
Smith  and  Elizabeth  Shilling.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  27,  1835,  came  to  Utah 


342 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


at  an  early  day,  and  was  called  to 
fill  a  mission  to  the  Pacific  Isles  April 
7,  1854.  He  arrived  in  Honolulu  Sept. 
27,  1854,  acted  as  president  of  the 
Mission  from  July  24,  1855,  to  Oct.  6, 
1857,  and  sailed  on  that  day  for  home 
on  the  ship  "Yankee."  Elder  Smith 
died  June  11,  1892,  in  Meadow,  Mil- 
lard Co.,  Utah. 

WADDOUPS,  Mark,  president  of 
the  Hawaiian  Mission  fi'om  1926  to 
1930,  was  born  Feb.  8,  1878,  in 
Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas 
Waddoups  and  Mary  Call.  He  was 
baptized  Feb.  8,  1886,  educated  in  the 
schools  of  Bountiful,  the  B.  Y.  U.,  at 
Prove,  and  the  L.  D.  S.  U.  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Hawaii 
in  1900-1904,  and  married  Olivia  Ses- 
sions Oct.  12,  1904,  which  union  was 
blessed  with  five  children.  The  fam- 
ily moved  to  Idaho  in  1905,  and  Elder 
Waddoups  taught  school  in  the  lose- 
pa  Colony  (Skull  Valley,  Utah)  in 
1904-1905.  He  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  losepa  in  May,  1906,  and  re- 
sided there  with  his  family  until  May, 
1917,  when  he  was  called  to  labor  in 
the  Salt  Lake  Temple  as  an  ordinance 
worker.  In  June,  1918,  he  was  called 
on  a  second  mission  to  Hawaii  to  pre- 
side over  the  Hawaiian  Temple.  After 
being  released  from  that  position  in 
June,  1924,  he  returned  to  Utah  with 
his  family,  but  in  October,  1924,  he 
was  called  again  to  preside  over  the 
Hawaiian  Temple.  His  family  joined 
him  in  June,  1925,  and  on  June  4,  1926, 
he  succeeded  Eugene  J.  Neff  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Mission. 

WOOLLEY,  Samuel  Edwin,  presi- 
dent of  the  Hawaiian  Mission  from 
1895  to  1919,  was  born  Oct.  22,  1859, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Samuel  W.  Woolley  and  Maria  Angell. 
He  was  baptized  in  1868,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Sandwich  Islands  in 
1880-1884.  In  1890  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  losepa  Colony  (Skull  Valley, 
Utah)  and  was  set  apart  to  preside 
over   the    Hawaiian    Mission    Aug.    9, 


1895.  While  presiding  he  had  charge 
of  the  erection  of  the  Hawaiian  TeA- 
ple,  was  president  of  the  Temple  after 
its  completion,  and  the  plantation  at 
Laie.  He  was  released  July  1,  1919, 
to  return  home. 


Icelandic  Mission 

Presidents:  Johan  P.  Lorentzen, 
1853-1854;  no  Zion  Elders  in  Iceland 
for  several  y^  ars;  Magnus  Bjarnason, 
1873-1874;  Thordur  Didrickson,  1875- 
1876;  Jon  Eyvindson,  1879-1881;  Gisli 
Bjarnason, 1882-1883;  Einar  Eirikson, 
1885-1886;  Haldor  B.  Jonson,  1886- 
1887;  Einar  Jonson,  1888-1890;  Thor- 
arinn  Bjarnason,  1894-1895;  Haldor 
Jonson,  1898-1900;  Jon  Johannesson, 
1900-1903;  Loftur  Bjarnason,  1903- 
1906;  Jacob  B.  Jonson,  1910-1912;  Ei- 
nar Eirikson  (second  term),  1912- 
1914. 

BJARNASON,  Gisle  E.,  president 
of  the  Icelandic  Mission  from  1882  to 
1883,  was  born  Nov.  25,  1849,  in  Ice- 
land, the  son  of  Einar  Bjarnason  and 
Gundrun  Jonason.  He  was  baptized 
in  1875,  and  later  emigrated  to  Utah. 
Having  been  called  to  perform  a  mis- 
sion to  Iceland,  he  arrived  in  Copen- 
hagen June  3,  1882,  and  was  by  the 
president  of  the  Scandin'avian  Mis- 
sion (of  which  mission  Iceland  was 
a  part),  appointed  to  preside  in 
Iceland,  from  which  position  he  was 
honorably  released  in  1883,  on  account 
of  ill  health,  and  returned  to  his  home 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  where  he  died 
Aug.  18,  1934. 

BJARNASON.  Loftur.  president  of 
the  Icelandic  Mission  from  1903  to 
1906,  Avas  born  March  15,  1879,  in 
Spanish  Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Gisle  E.  Bjarnason  and  Hal- 
dora  Jonson.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  of  age  and  later 
emigrated  to  Utah.  Called  to  fill  a 
mission  to  Iceland,  he  arrived  in  Rey- 
kjavik   April    21,    1903,    and    labored 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


343 


diligently  and  with  some  success  part 
of  the  time  without  a  missionary  com- 
panion. On  Elder  Jon  Johanneson's 
departure  for  home,  Elder  Bjarnason 
succeeded  him  as  president  of  the 
mission,  being  appointed  to  that  po- 
sition, June  16,  1903.  Bro.  Bjarna- 
son was  a  faithful  Elder,  but  had  to 
seek  employment  in  a  store  on  Vest- 
manoen  in  order  to  meet  expenses.  He 
baptized  eight  persons  and  left  for 
home  in  1906. 

BJARNASON,  Magnus,  president 
of  the  Icelandic  Mission  fi'om  1873  to 
1874,  was  born  Aug.  3,  1815,  in  Kross 
Kirke,  Rangarvalla,  Iceland,  the  son 
of  Bjarna  Bjarnason  and  Thorbiorg 
Gudmund.  He  was  baptized  June  3, 
1853,  and  later  emigrated  to  Utah. 
Being  called  on  a  mission  he  arrived 
in  Copenhagen  May  30,  1873,  and  was 
appointed  to  labor  in  Iceland.  He  la- 
bored diligently  until  June,  1874,  when 
he  left  Iceland  and  returned  to  his 
home  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  bringing 
with  him  eleven  persons,  seven  of 
whom  were  baptized  after  their  ar- 
I'ival  in  Utah.  Elder  Bjarnason  suffer- 
ed some  persecution  on  his  mission, 
having  been  arrested  three  different 
times  for  distributing  Mormon  litera- 
ture, and  for  discussing  religion  in 
people's  homes. 

BJARNASON,  Thovarinne,  presi- 
dent of  the  Icelandic  Mission  from 
1894  to  1895,  was  born  June  17,  1849, 
at  Skaptafill,  Iceland,  the  son  of  Bjar- 
ni  Magnusson  and  Karitas  Jacobson. 
He  was  baptized  in  1882,  emigrated 
to  Utah  and  made  his  home  in  Span- 
ish Fork.  Having  been  called  on  a 
mission  to  Iceland,  he  arrived  in  Rey- 
kjavik Feb.  1,  1894,  and  labored  with 
some  success  in  Iceland  until  he,  be- 
ing honorably  released,  sailed  for 
home  July  4,  1895.  Elder  Bjarnason 
died  in  Spanish  Fork  about  1924. 

DIDRICKSON,  Thordur,  president 
of  the  Icelandic  Mission  from  1875 
to  1876,  was  born  March  28,  1828,  at 


Usterlandane,  Iceland.  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  17,  1855,  and  emigrated  to 
Utah  afterwards.  In  1875  he  was 
called  to  perform  a  mission  to  Ice- 
land, and  arrived  with  other  Utah  El- 
ders in  Copenhagen  May  24,  1875.  He 
was  appointed  by  the  president  of  the 
Scandinavian  Mission  to  preside  over 
the  mission  in  Iceland,  where  he  la- 
bored with  some  success  in  spite  of 
opposition,  and  returned  to  his  home 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  in  the  fall  of 
1876. 

EIRIKSON,  Einar,  president  of  the 
Icelandic  Mission  from  1885  to  1886, 
was  born  Dec.  30,  1847,  in  Iceland,  and 
died  at  Elmo,  Emery  Co.,  Utah,  Oct. 
8,  1931.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 
525.) 

EYVINDSON,  Jon,  president  of  the 
Icelandic  Mission  from  1879  to  1881, 
was  born  June  14,  1845,  at  Ran- 
garvalla sysla,  Ustrelandane,  Iceland, 
the  son  of  Eyvind  and  Anna  Jonson. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1874. 

JOHANNESON,  Jon,  president  of 
the  Icelandic  Mission  from  1900  to 
1903,  was  born  June  2,  1862,  at  Hruta- 
firdi,  Hunavatus,  Iceland,  the  son  of 
Johannes  Johnson  and  Sophia  Gun- 
haugson.  He  was  baptized  May  13, 
1894,  emigrated  to  Utah  and  made  his 
home  for  many  years  in  Cleveland, 
Emery  Co.,  Utah.  To  fill  a  mission 
in  Iceland,  he  left  Salt  Lake  City, 
Aug.  18,  1900,  and  arrived  in  Reykja- 
vik Sept.  28,  1900.  During  his  mis- 
sionary labors  he  baptized  ten  new 
members,  ordained  three  and  blessed 
thirteen  children.  He  also  aided  five 
to  emigrate  to  America.  At  the  close 
of  his  mission,  there  was  a  member- 
ship in  Iceland  of  thirty-nine  souls. 
While  in  Iceland,  Elder  Johanneson, 
besides  his  other  duties,  composed  and 
published  a  number  of  tracts.  Elder 
Johanneson  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Feb.  17,  1930. 

JONSON,  Einar,  president  of  the 
Icelandic  Mission  from  1888  to  1890, 


344 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


was  born  Aug.  16,  1839,  at  Gotshyld, 
Rangarvalla  sysla,  Iceland,  the  son  of 
John  Haldorson  and  Gudrun  Jonson. 
He  was  baptized  May  25,  1874,  and 
soon  emigrated  to  America.  After  his 
release  as  a  missionary,  he  accepted 
a  position  as  commander  of  a  small 
fishing  vessel,  and  while  engaged  in 
unloading  its  cargo  on  Westmanoen 
in  1900,  a  barrel  of  fish  liver  fell  on 
him,  after  which  accident  he  only 
lived  an  hour  or  two,  when  he  died. 

JONSON,  Haider,  president  of  the 
Icelandic  Mission  from  1898  to  1900, 
was  born  March  1,  1856,  at  Mealdland, 
Straftafalls,  Iceland,  the  son  of  Jon 
and  Margaret  Jonson.  He  was  bap- 
tized Nov.  29,  1880,  emigrated  to  the 
United  States  in  1881,  and  located  at 
Ferron,  Utah,  in  1891.  Elder  Jonson 
filled  two  missions  to  his  native  land, 
one  in  1898-1900,  laboring  faithfully 
and  well  for  25  months,  and  again 
in  1910-1913.  Elder  Jonson  died  in 
Cleveland,  Emery  Co.,  Utah,  Jan.  11, 
1936. 

JONSON,  Haider  B.,  president  of 
the  Icelandic  Mission  from  1886  to 
1887,  was  born  June  11,  1852,  at 
Reykjavik,  Iceland,  the  son  of  Jon 
Jonson  and  Asa  Michelson.  He  was 
baptized  April  2,  1881,  emigrated  to 
Utah,  and  later  filled  a  mission  to 
his  native  land  as  stated.  He  died 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  Nov.  24,  1925. 

JONSON,  Jacob  Baldwin,  president 
of  the  Icelandic  Mission  fi'om  1910 
to  1912,  was  born  May  21,  1843,  in 
Hinavatu,  Iceland,  the  son  of  Jon 
Benedictson  and  Sigridur  Skuladthson. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  6,  1877,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  and  settled  in  1873 
in  Spanish  Fork,  where  he  died  July 
23,  1930. 

LORENTZEN,  Johan  P.,  president 
of  the  Icelandic  Mission  from  1853  to 
1854,  was  born  May  23,  1815,  in  Co- 
penhagen, Denmark,  and  was  baptized 
April   19,  1851.     Bro.  Johan   P.  Lor- 


entzen  never  emigrated  to  America, 
but  died  in  Copenhagen,  almost  lost 
and  forgotten  by  his  former  associ- 
ates in  the  Church. 


Indian    Territory    Mission 

Presidents:  Henry  W.  Miller,  1855- 
1856;  Washington  N.  Cook,  1856- 
1858;  Henry  Eyring,  1858-1860; 
Matthew  W.  Dalton,  March,  1877-No- 
vember,  1877;  George  Teasdale,  April- 
September,  1883;  Matthew  W.  Dal- 
ton (second  term),  1883-1884;  Andrew 
Kimball,  1885-1897;  William  T.  Jack, 
1897-1898. 

Note:  The  name  of  the  Indian  Ter- 
ritory Mission  was  changed  to  the 
Southwestern  States  Mission  in  March, 
1898. 

COOK,  Washington  N,,  president  of 
the  Indian  Territory  Mission  from 
1856  to  1858.  (  See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  620.) 

DALTON,  Matthew  William,  presi- 
dent of  the  Indian  Territory  Mission 
in  1877,  and  from  1883  to  1884,  was 
born  Nov.  1,  1828,  in  Madrid,  St.  Law- 
rence Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  John  Dalton 
and  Mary  McGovern.  His  mother  died 
when  he  v/as  six  years  old.  His  fa- 
ther married  again  and  his  wife  be- 
came a  real  mother  to  the  boy  who 
came  to  America  when  a  young  man. 
His  journey  across  the  plains,  up  the 
Platte  River,  over  onto  the  Bear  River 
and  thence  north  into  Idaho,  was  one 
of  thrilling  experiences,  meeting  hun- 
dreds of  buffalo  and  wild  Indians.  Go- 
ing south  he  walked  through  the  pres- 
ent site  of  Willard,  and  after  walking 
some  14  miles  he  arrived  at  Ogden 
Sept.  5,  1850,  where  he  found  a  few 
scattered  "Mormons."  Having  become 
interested  in  the  Mormon  people  he 
decided  to  remain,  and  he  built  a 
home  on  the  block  now  occupied  by 
the  Broom  Hotel  in  Ogden.  He  was 
baptized   Dec.   12,  1850,  and  in  1853 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


345 


made  his  home  in  Willai-d.  While  on 
his  missions  among  the  Indians  he 
taught  them  how  to  farm,  erected  the 
first  house  for  the  Indian  Mission  and 
performed  a  remarkable  work  among 
the  natives.  He  also  filled  missions 
in  Mexico,  Europe  and  in  various 
parts  of  the  United  States.  He  pre- 
sided over  the  59th  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty for  48  years,  built  a  sailing  boat, 
was  hotel  keeper  at  Willard,  served 
as  justice  of  the  peace,  school  trus- 
tee and  captain  in  the  territorial  mi- 
litia, and  was  a  delegate  to  the  con- 
stitutional convention.  He  also  gave 
considerable  attention  to  the  study  of 
astronomy  and  writing.  His  most  not- 
able work,  the  "Key  To  This  Earth," 
in  which  he  discussed  the  planetary 
system,  gained  a  wide  circulation. 
He  died  at  the  advanced  age  of  89 
years,  at  Willard,  Utah,  .March  14, 
1918. 

EYRING,   Henry,  president  of  the 
Indian   Territory   Mission   from    1858 


to  1860,  died  Feb.  10,  1902.    (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  311.) 

JACK,  William  T.,  president  of  the 


Lake    City,    Utah.     (See   Bio.    Ency. 
Vol.  1,  p.  304.) 

KIMBALL,    Andrew,    president    of 
the    Indian    Tei-ritory    Mission    from 


1885  to  1897,  died  Aug.  31,  1924,   (.See 
Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  1,  p.  364.) 

MILLER,  Henry  W.,  president  of 
the  Indian  Tei-ritory  Mission  from 
1855  to  1856,  died  Oct.  9,  1885.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  165.) 

TEASDALE,  George,  president  of 
the  Indian  Territory  Mission  in  1883, 
died  June  9,  1907.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,. 
Vol.  1,  p.  144,  also  Vol.  3,  p.  790.) 


Italian  Mission 


Presidents:  Lorenzo  Snow,  1850- 
1851;    Jabez    Woodard,    1851-1854. 

SNOW,  Lorenzo,  president  of  the 
Italian  Mission  from  1850  to  1851. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  26.) 

WOODARD,  Jabez,  president  of  the 
Italian    Mission    from    1851    to    1854, 


Indian    Territory   Mission   from   1897      died  March  2,  1870.    (See  Bio.  Ency., 
to   1898,   died   Dec.   15,   1934,  in  Salt      Vol.  3,  p.  571.) 


346 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


Japan  Mission 

Presidents:  Heber  J.  Grant,  1901- 
1903;  Horace  Samuel  Ensign,  1903- 
1908;  Alma  0.  Taylor,  1908-1910;  El- 
bert D.  Thomas,  1910-1912;  Heber 
Grant  Ivins,  1912-1915;  Joseph  Henry 
Stimpson,  1915-1921;  Lloyd  Ivie,  1921- 
1923;  Hilton  A.  Robertson,  1923-1924. 
The  mission  was  closed  in  June,  1924. 

GRANT,  Heber  J.,  president  of  the 
Japan  Mission  from  1901  to  1903. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  147,  and 
Vol.  3,  p.  746.) 


IVINS,  Heber  Grant,  president  of 
the  Japan  Mission  from  1912  to  1915, 
was  born  Sept.  2,  1889,  in  St.  George, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Anthony  W.  Ivins  and 
Elizabeth  Snow.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  was  set  apart 
Oct.  28,  1910,  for  a  mission  to  Japan, 
and  pi-esided  over  the  Japan  Mission 
from  Oct.  24,  1912,  to  July  24,  1915. 
He  returned  to  his  home  in  Utah  Aug. 
21,  1915. 

IVIE,  Lloyd  Oscar,  president  of  the 
Japan  Mission  from  1921  to  1923,  was 
born  Oct.  9,  1890,  in  Salina,  Utah,  a 
son  of  James  Oscar  Ivie  and  Anna 
Catherine  Mortensen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  9,  1898,  filled  a  mission  to 
Japan  in  1911-1915,  and  was  set  apart 


for  a  second  mission  to  Japan,  to  act 
as  president  of  that  mission,  Jan.  18, 
1921.  He  returned  from  this  second 
mission  in  January,   1924. 

ROBERTSON,  Hilton  A.,  president 
of  the  Japan  Mission  from  1923  to 
1924.    (See  Kolob  Stake.) 

STIMPSON,  Joseph  Henry,  presi- 
dent of  the  Japan  Mission  from  1915 
to  1921,  was  born  June  12,  1885,  in 
Riverdale,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
William  Stimpson,  jun.,  and  Ann  Mary 
Christensen.  He  was  baptized  June 
12,  1893,  filled  a  mission  to  Japan  in 
1906-1912,  and  was  called  to  fill  a 
second  mission  to  that  country,  being 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  mission 
Feb.  15,  1915.  He  labored  in  that  ca- 
pacity from  July  24,  1915,  to  Feb. 
18,  1921. 

TAYLOR.  Alma  O.,  president  of 
the  Japan  Mission  from  1908  to  1910, 
was  born  Aug.  1,  1882,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jos.  E.  Taylor 
and  Lisadore  Williams.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  6,  1890,  ordained  an  Elder 
Sept.  19,  1900,  and  was  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Japan  July  18,  1901.  He 
presided  over  the  Japan  Mission  from 
July  8,  1905,  to  Jan.  1,  1910,  and  as- 
sisted in  the  translation  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon  into  the  Japanese  lan- 
guage. He  returned  to  Utah  April 
26,   1910. 

THOMAS,  Elbert  D.,  president  of 
the  Japan  Mission  from  1910  to  1912. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  2,  p.  722,  and 
Vol.  4,  p.  225.) 


Malta  Mission 


Jabez  Woodward,  1852;  Thomas  L. 
Obray,  1852-1853;  James  F.  Bell, 
pro  tem.,  1853. 

BELL,  James  F.,  president  of  the 
Malta  Mission  from  April  to  June, 
1853.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  596.) 

OBRAY,  Thomas  Lorenzo,  presi- 
dent of  the  Malta  Mission  from  1852 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


347 


to  1853,  was  born  July  23,  1824,  in 
Pembrokeshire,  South  Wales,  a  son 
of  John  B.  Obray  and  Elenor  Allen. 
He  was  baptized  in  September,  1845, 
by  William  Henshaw,  in  Wales,  la- 
bored as  a  missionary  in  England  in 
the  Kent  Conference,  presiding  over 
that  conference  part  of  the  time,  and 
was  called  to  fill  a  mission  in  Malta 
Nov.  1,  1851.  After  being  ordained 
a  High  Priest,  Elder  Obray  landed 
in  Malta  in  May,  1852,  having  been 
sent  bj?^  Apostle  Lorenzo  Snow  to 
preside  over  the  Malta  Mission.  He 
went  back  to  England  on  account  of 
his  health,  arriving  there  April  23, 
1853,  but  returned  to  Malta  June  19, 
1853.  While  he  was  absent  James  F. 
Bell  acted  as  president  of  the  Malta 
Mission.  Elder  Obray  raised  up  a 
branch  of  the  Church  in  Malta,  was 
released  in  November,  1853,  and  left 
Liverpool,  England,  March  22,  1854, 
bound  for  Utah.  After  his  arrival  in 
Utah  he  settled  in  Wellsville,  Cache 
Co.,  in  1856,  being  one  of  the  first 
settlers  in  that  place.  He  filled  a 
mission  to   England   in   1881-1882. 

WOODWARD,  Jabez,  president  of 
the  Malta  Mission  in  1852.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  571.) 


Mexican  Mission 

Presidents:  Daniel  W.  Jones,  1876- 
1877;  Helaman  Pratt,  1877-1879; 
Moses  Thatcher,  1879-1880;  James  Z. 
Stewart  pro  tem.,  February-  Decem- 
ber, 1880;  Moses  Thatcher  (second 
term),  1880-1881;  August  H.  F. 
Wilcken,  1882-1883;  Anthony  W. 
Ivins,  1883-1884;  Helaman  Pratt  (sec- 
ond term),  1884-1887;  Horace  H. 
Cummings,  in  1887;  Amnion  M.  Ten- 
ney,  1887-1889. 

After  the  re-opening  of  the  mission 
in  1901:  Ammon  M.  Tenney  (second 
term),  1901-1903;  Hyrum  S.  Harris, 
1903-1904;  Talma  E.  Pomeroy,  1904- 
1905;  Hyrum  S.  Harris  (second  term), 
1905-1907;  Rey  L.  Pratt,  1907-1930. 


CUMMINGS,  Horace  H.,  president 
of  the  Mexican  Mission  in  1887.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  1,  p.  713.) 

HARRIS,  Hyrum  S.,  president  of 
the  Mexican  Mission  from  1903  to 
1904  and  from  1905  to  1907.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  129.) 

IVINS,  Anthony  W.,  president  of 
the    Mexican    Mission    from    1883    to 


1884,  died  Sept.  27,  1934,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  311,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  750.) 

JONES,  Daniel  W.,  president  of  the 
Mexican  Mission  from  1876  to  1877, 
was  born  Aug.  6,  1830,  in  Boonslick, 
Howard  Co.,  Missouri,  the  son  of 
Wylie  Jones  and  Margaret  S.  Cloyd. 
He  joined  the  army  which  marched 
from  Santa  Fe,  N.  M.,  to  California,  in 
1849,  was  accidentally  wounded  by  a 
shot  near  Provo,  Utah;  heard  the 
Gospel  and  was  baptized  in  1851.  He 
assisted  Elder  Trejo  in  the  transla- 
tion of  the  Book  of  Mormon  into  the 
Spanish  language  in  1874  and  1875; 
preached  the  Gospel  among  the  La- 
manites,  wrote  the  book,  "Forty 
Years  Among  the  Indians,"  and  died 
in  Mesa  City,  Arizona,  April  29,  1915. 

PRATT,  Helaman,  president  of  the 
Mexican    Mission    in    1877,    and    from 


348 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1884  to  1887,  was  born  May  31,  1846, 
at  Mt.  Pisgah,  Iowa,  a  son  of  Pai'ley 
P.  Pratt  and  Mary  Wood.  He  came 
to  the  "Valley"  in  September,  1847, 
was  baptized  March  25,  1854,  set  apart 
for  his  first  mission  to  Mexico,  Oct. 
9,  1876,  and  returned  Dec.  17,  1877. 
He  was  set  apart  for  a  second  mis- 
sion to  Mexico  April  9,  1883,  and  upon 
the  departure  of  Pres.  Anthony  W. 
Ivins,  March  28,  1884,  became  presi- 
dent of  the  mission.  When  the  Juar- 
ez Stake  was  organized  he  was  chosen 
as  a  counselor  to  Pres.  Anthony  W. 
Ivins.  He  also  helped  to  colonize  the 
"Muddy"  and  the  Sevier  missions, 
and  was  always  looking  ahead,  plan- 
ning, counseling,  encouraging  and 
fighting,  if  necessary,  to  maintain  the 
right  and  secure  justice  for  his  people. 
For  five  years  he  served  on  the  po- 
lice force  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  died 
Nov.  26,  1909,  in  Colonia  Dublan, 
Mexico. 

PRATT,  Rey  Lucero,  president  of 
the  Mexican  Mission  from  1907  to 
1931,  was  born  Oct.  11,  1878,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Helaman 
Pratt  and  Emmeline  Victoria  Billings- 
ley.  He  went  with  his  parents  to 
Mexico  in  October,  1887,  and  located 
in  Juarez,  where  he  learned  Spanish 
from  the  natives.  He  was  called  on 
a  mission  in  1906,  and  in  September, 
1907,  he  became  president  of  the 
Mexican  Mission.  In  1925  he  was 
chosen  as  one  of  the  First  Council  of 
Seventy.  He  died  while  acting  in  that 
capacity  April  14,  1931,  in  a  Salt  Lake 
hospital,  following   an  operation. 

POMEROY,  Talma  E.,  president  of 
the  Mexican  Mission  from  1904  to 
1905.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  52.) 

STEWART,  James  Z.,  president 
pro  tem.  of  the  Mexican  Mission 
from  Feb.  4,  to  Dec.  5,  1880,  died  June 
16,  1931,  in  Logan,  Utah.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  416.) 

TENNEY,  Ammon  M.,  president  of 
the    Mexican    Mission    from    1887    to 


1889,  and  from  1901  to  1903,  was 
born  Nov.  16,  1844,  in  Lee  County, 
Iowa,  the  son  of  Nathan  C,  Tenney 
and  Olive  Strong.  He  came  to  Utah 
in  1848,  went  to  California  with  his 
father  who  was  called  to  San  Bernar- 
dino, and  there  learned  the  Spanish 
language.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  sent 
with  Jacob  Hamblin  as  interpreter 
among  the  Indians,  and  spent  15  years 
among  the  Red  Men.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Daniel  H.  Wells.  He 
died  Oct.  28,  1925,  in  SaflFord,  Arizona. 

THATCHER,    Moses,    president    of 
the    Mexican    Mission    from    1879    to 


1880,  and  from  1880  to  1881.   (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  127.  also  Vol.  3,  p.  791.) 

WILCKEN,  August  H.  F.,  president 
of  the  Mexican  Mission  from  1882 
to  1883,  was  born  Feb.  17,  1837,  in 
Eckhorst,  Oldenburg,  Germany,  the 
son  of  Charles  H.  Wilcken  and  Anna 
Stoffer.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  31, 
1873,  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Mexi- 
co June  25,  1880,  and  returned  May 
5,  1883.  He  died  Sept.  30,  1886,  in  Salt 
Lake  Citv,  Utah. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


349 


Middle  States  Mission 


Netherlands  Mission 


Ben  (Benjamin)  Erastus  Rich,  who 
presided  from  1902  to  1903,  was  the 
only  president  of  the  Middle  States 
Mission. 

RICH,  Benjamin  Erastus,  president 
of  the  Middle  States  Mission  from  1902 
to  1903,  was  popularly  known  as  Ben 
E.  Rich.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p. 
206.) 


Montana  Mission 

Thomas  E.  Ricks,  president  of  the 
Bannock  Stake,  supervised  the  open- 
ing of  the  Montana  Mission  in  1896- 
1898,  but  Phineus  Tempest  was  placed 
in  charge  of  the  actual  missionary  la- 
bor in  Montana  by  President  Ricks, 
Bro.  Tempest  was  succeeded  Oct.  25, 
1897,  by  Franklin  S.  Bramwell,  who 
presided  until  April,  1898,  when  the 
Montana  Mission  was  merged  into 
the  Northwestern   States   Mission. 

BRAMWELL,  Franklin  S.,  president 
of  the  Montana  Mission  fi'om  1897 
to  1898.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  771.) 

RICKS,  Thomas  E.,  was  temporary 
president  of  the  Montana  Mission 
from  1897  to  1898.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  1,  p.  455.) 

TEMPEST,  Phineus,  president  of 
the  Montana  Mission  under  the  direc- 
tion of  Thos.  E.  Ricks,  president  of 
the  Bannock  Stake,  from  1896  to  1897, 
was  born  Dec.  2,  1845,  in  Halifax, 
England,  the  son  of  William  Henry 
Tempest  and  Mary  Lambert.  He  was 
baptized  Dec.  6,  1862,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1865,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  16,  1884,  by  Geo.  Q.  Cannon, 
and  was  called  to  follow  up  the  la- 
bors of  Elders  Edward  Stevenson  and 
Mathias  F.  Cowley,  in  Montana,  Aug. 
6,  1896. 


(During    some    years   also   known   as 
the     Netherlands-Belgium     Mission.) 

Presidents:  Paul  A.  Schettler,  1861- 
1862;  A.  W.  van  der  Woude,  1862-1863; 
Samuel  Mets,  1863-1864;  Joseph  Wei- 
ler,  1864-1867;  Francis  A.  Brown,  1867; 
Marcus  Holling,  1867-1869;  Jan  F. 
Krumperman,  1869-1871;  Sybren  van 
Dyk,  1871-1874;  Dirk  Bockholt,  1874- 
1875;  Peter  J.  Lammers,  1875-1877; 
Johannes  Hansink,  1877;  Bernhard  H. 
Schettler,  1877-1878;  Frederik  Peters, 
1878-1880;  Sybren  van  Dyk  (second 
term),  1880-1882;  Zwier  W.  Koldewyn, 
1882;  Peter  J.  Lammers  (second  term), 
1882-1884;  Zwier  W.  Koldewyn  (sec- 
ond term),  1884-1885;  John  W.  F.  Vol- 
ker,  1885-1889;  Francis  A.  Brown 
(second  term),  1889-1891;  Timothy 
Mets,  1891-1892;  Alfred  L.  Farrell, 
1892-1893;  Edwin  Bennion,  1893-1895; 
Asa  W.  Judd,  1895-1896;  George  S. 
Spencer,  1896;  Fred  Pieper,  1896-1897; 
Alfred  L.  Farrell  (second  term),  1897- 
1900;  Sylvester  Q.  Cannon,  1900-1902; 
Willard  T.  Cannon,  1902-1905;  Jacob 
H.  Trayner,  1905-1906;  Alex.  Nibley, 
1906-1907;  Sylvester  Q.  Cannon  (sec- 
ond term),  1907-1909;  James  H.  Walk- 
er, 1909;  Brigham  G.  Thatcher,  1909- 
1911;  Roscoe  W.  Eardley,  1911-1913; 
Thomas  C.  Hair,  1913-1914;  LeGrand 
Richards,  1914-1916;  John  A.  Butter- 
worth,  1916-1920;  John  P.  Lillywhite, 
1920-1923;  Charles  S.  Hyde,  1923-1926; 
John  P.  Lillywhite  (second  term),  1926- 
1929;  Frank  I.  Kooyman,  1929-1933. 

BENNION,  Edwin,  president  of  the 
Netherlands  Mission  from  1893  to  1895, 
was  born  April  8,  1868,  at  Taylorsville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Bennion  and  Mary 
Turpin.  He  was  baptized  in  May,  1876, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  14,  1892,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Netherlands  in  1892-1895,  being 
set  apart,  together  with  his  wife,  Mary 


350 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Emma  Lindsay 
Bennion,    Oct.     14, 

1892.  On  May  21, 

1893,  he  succeeded 
Alfred  L.  Farrell  as 
president  of  the 
mission.  He  was 
succeeded  by  Asa 
W.  Judd. 

From  1900  to  1903  he  served  as  sec- 
ond counselor,  and  from  1903  to  1911  as 
first  counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Granite  Stake,  Utah.  He  died  at 
Draper,  Utah,  April  3,  1930. 

BOCK  HOLT,  Derek  (or  Dirk),  presi- 
dent of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1874  to  1875,  was  born  Oct.  6.   1843, 
at   Gorinchem,   Netherlands,  a  son  of 
Herman  H.  Bockholt 
and  Annie  Valk.   He 
was  baptized  Nov.  1, 
f^,  1863,     by     John     L. 

*'^*  Smith,  and  left  Rot- 

terdam June  1,  1864, 
as  an  emij^rant  for 
Utah.  Having  be- 
come a  member  of 
the  36th  Quorum  of 
was  set  apart  for  a 
his  native  land  Aug. 
28,  1874,  and  appointed  to  preside  over 
the  mission.  He  translated  and  pub- 
lished in  the  Netherlands  language, 
"The  Kingdom  of  God,"  by  Parley  P. 
Pratt.  In  civic  life  he  served  as  clerk 
of  Salt  Lake  County,  both  before  and 
after  his  mission  period.    He  died  Jan. 

I,  1887,  at  Salt  Lake  City.  (See  also 
Bio.   Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  24.) 

BROWN,  Francis  Almond,  president 
of  the  Netherlands  Mission  in  1867 
and  again  from  1889  to  1891,  was  born 
Nov.  14,  1822,  in  Millford,  Otsego  Co., 
New  York,  a  son  of  Jesse  Brown  and 
Roxana  Grant.    He  was  baptized  Feb. 

II,  1844,  by  John  Lane.  For  two  years 
he  studied  in  the  Genesee  Wesleyan 
Seminary  at  Lima,  New  York.  In  the 
summer  of  1844  he  filled  a  short  mis- 


Seventy, 
mission 


he 
to 


sion  among  relatives  and  friends,  and 
in  October  of  that  year  he  gathered  to 
Nauvoo.     He   taught   school   in   Iowa 
and  in  the  Music  Hall 
at  Nauvoo.     In  1851 
he    filled    a    second 
short     mission     to 
•^  Nova     Scotia,     a  n  d 

^^Ar  ^^^         moved    to    Utah    in 
I^BhB^      1856.      In    1865    he 
f|HHH|r^       was   called   to   labor 
s^^  as    a    missionary    in 

the  Netherlands,  and 
in  1867  he  succeeded  Joseph  Weiler 
as  president  of  the  mission.  During 
his  second  mission,  he  published  the 
Book  of  Mormon  in  the  Dutch  or  Neth- 
erlands language,  the  translation  hav- 
ing been  made  by  his  pi-edecessor,  John 
W.  F.  Volker. 

He  taught  school  in  Ogden,  becom- 
ing the  leader,  if  not  practically  the 
founder  of  education  in  Weber  county. 
He  served  as  probate  judge,  alderman 
and  justice  of  the  peace,  and  also  was 
secretary  and  later  president  of  irriga- 
tion companies.  He  died  June  9,  1894, 
at  Ogden,  Utah.  (See  also  "Historical 
Record",  Vol.  5,  p.  114.) 

BUTTERWORTH,     John     Addison, 

president  of  the  Netherlands  Mission 
from  1916  to  1920,  was  born  Oct.  15, 
1882,  at  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of 
William  J.  Butter- 
worth  and  Melinda 
H.  North.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  6, 
1890,  became  a 
member  of  the  61st 
Quorum  of  Seven- 
ty, and  filled  two 
missions  to  the 
Netherlands,  the 
first  one  in  1906-1909.  His  presi- 
dency, during  his  second  mission,  in- 
cluded three  years  of  the  World  war, 
when  only  a  small  number  of  mission- 
aries from  America  were  laboring  in 
Holland,    the    majority    having    been 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


351 


transferred  to  the  United  States 
shortly  after  the  outbreak  of  the  dis- 
astrous conflagration.  Holland  man- 
aged to  keep  out  of  the  war,  but  her 
manifold  cares,  principally  the  lack  of 
sufficient  food  stuffs,  put  the  people  in 
a  depressed,  dissatisfied  and  unspirit- 
ual  mood,  making  missionary  labors 
much  harder  than  ever  before  in  the 
history  of  the  mission.  President  But- 
terworth  was  not  allowed  to  enter 
Belgium,  but  he  aided  the  Brussels  and 
Liege  conferences  with  funds  fi-om  the 
headquarters  of  the  mission  at  Rotter- 
dam. He  is  a  teacher  at  the  Granite 
Junior  High  School. 

CANNON,  Sylvester  Quayle,  presi- 
dent of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1900  to  1902  and  from  1907  to  1909, 
was  born  June  10,  1877,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  George  Q.  Can- 
non and  Elizabeth 
Hoagland.  He  was 
baptized  June  10, 
1885,  by  his  father, 
who  also  ordained 
him  a  Seventy, 
Sept.  1,  1899.  On 
the  latter  date  he 
was  set  apart  for 
his  first  mission  to  the  Nether- 
lands and  arrived  in  Rotterdam  Sept. 
28,  1899.  He  labored  in  the  Liege  con- 
ference till  August,  1900,  when  he  was 
appointed  to  succeed  mission  president 
Alfred  L.  Farrell.  In  the  spring  of 
1902  he  accompanied  Pres.  Francis  M. 
Lyman  of  the  European  Mission  on  a 
trip  to  Turkey  and  Palestine,  and  on 
Oct.  8,  of  the  same  year,  he  was  suc- 
ceeded in  the  mission  presidency  by  his 
brother  Willard  T.  Cannon.  On  May 
19,  1907,  he  arrived  in  Rotterdam  for 
a  second  mission,  accompanied  by  his 
wife,  Winnifred  S.,  and  two  childi'en: 
Julian  and  Elinor.  This  time  Elder 
Cannon  succeeded  Alex.  Nibley  as  pi-es- 
ident  of  the  mission. 

Prior  to  his  first  mission,  in  1899, 
Elder  Cannon  graduated  with  the  de- 


gree of  Bachelor  of  Science  in  Mining 
Engineering  after  pursuing  a  four- 
year  course  at  the  Massachusetts  In- 
stitute of  Technology  at  Boston.  He 
presided  over  the  Pioneer  Stake  in 
1917-1925,  and  on  June  4,  1925,  was 
chosen  to  succeed  Chas.  W.  Nibley  as 
Presiding  Bishop  of  the  Church.  (See 
also  Improvement  Era,  Vol.  28,  p.  887.) 

CANNON,  Willard  Telle,  president 
of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from  1902 
to  1905,  was  born  June  20,  1877,  at 
St.  George,  Utah,  a  son  of  George  Q. 
Cannon  and  Mar- 
tha Telle.  He  was 
baptized  June  25, 
1885,  by  his  father, 
and  on  Jan.  27, 
1902,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy 
and  set  apart  for 
his  mission  by  Rud- 
ger  Clawson.  Ar- 
riving in  Rotter- 
dam Feb.  26,  1902,  he  was  assigned 
to  labor  in  the  Liege  conference, 
and  on  Oct.  8,  of  that  year,  succeeded 
his  brother  Sylvester  Q.  as  president 
of  the  mission.  In  Belgium  Elder  Can- 
non spoke  French,  and  in  Holland  he 
acquired  a  good  working  knowledge  of 
the  Dutch  or  Netherlands  language. 
Having  been  honorably  released,  he 
left  Rotterdam  for  home  April  17, 
1905,  after  turning  the  affairs  of  the 
mission  over  to  Jacob  H.  Trayner,  his 
successor.  Elder  Cannon  is  now  vice- 
president  and  general  manager  of  the 
Utah-Idaho  Sugar  Company  at  Salt 
Lake  City. 

EARDLEY,  Roscoe  Woolley,  presi- 
dent of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1911  to  1913,  was  born  Feb.  13,  1880, 
at  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
James  Walter  Eardley  and  Catherine 
Adella  Woolley.  He  was  baptized 
June  8,  1888,  and  on  Oct.  13,  1899,  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  the  Netherlands  by 
Geo.  Reynolds.     On  Oct.  17,  1911,  he 


352 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


was  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Netherlands  Mission  by  Pres.  Joseph 
F.  Smith.  On  this  second  Mission  he 
was  accompanied 
by  his  wife,  Ella 
May  Patten  Eard- 
ley  (born  June  14, 
1882,  at  Salt  Lake 
City,  a  daughter  of 
Thomas  C.  Patten 
and  Mary  A.  New- 
man), who  was  set 
apart  by  Anthon  H. 
Lund.  Elder  Eai-dley  served  as  Bishop 
of  the  Salt  Lake  City  3rd  Ward, 
Liberty  Stake,  in  1920-1924.  He  is 
now  manager  of  the  United  Grocery 
Company  at  Salt  Lake  City. 

FARRELL,  Alfred  Lundberg,  presi- 
dent of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1892  to  1893  and  from  1897  to  1900, 
was   bora   March   4,  1868,   at  Logan, 

Utah,     a     son     of 

George  L.  Farrell 
and  Mary  Charlotte 
Lundberg.  He  was 
baptized  June  7, 
1877,  by  his  father, 
and  was  set  apai't 
for  his  first  mission 
Feb.  20,  1891.  On 
Oct.  12,  1892,  he 
succeeded  Timothy  Mets  as  president 
of  the  mission.  On  his  second  mission 
he  was  accompanied  by  his  wife,  Luna 
Angel  Thatcher  Farrell,  who  was  boi-n 
Dec.  17,  1875,  at  Salt  Lake  City,  a 
daughter  of  George  W.  Thatcher  and 
Luna  Young.  Elder  and  Sister  Farrell 
were  set  apart  August  13,  1897.  This 
time  Elder  Farrell  succeeded  Freder- 
ick Pieper  as  president  of  the  mission, 
and  labored  diligently  for  nearly  three 
years,  rendering  highly  successful 
service.  Sister  Farrell  gave  birth  to 
a  child  (Luna  Charlotta)  while  on  her 
mission,  and  returned  home  with  her 
baby  after  serving  as  a  missionary  for 
two  years.  Elder  Farrell  was  succeed- 
ed by  Sylvester  Q.  Cannon. 


HAIR,  Thomas  C,  temporary  presi- 
dent of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1913  to  1914,  was  born  Nov.  19,  1885, 
at  Ephraim,  Utah,  a  son  of  Nicholas 
C.  Hair  and  Mary 
E.  Haddon.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  1, 
1894,  set  apart  for 
his  mission  Oct.  17, 
1911,  and  ordained 
a  Seventy  at  Rot- 
terdam pursuant  to 
a  letter  from  the 
First  Presidency, 
dated  July  21,  1913. 
He  succeeded  Pres.  Roscoe  W.  Eai-dley, 
who  sailed  from  Rotterdam  July  26, 
1913,  Elder  Hair  having  served  as 
mission  secretary  for  some  time  under 
Pres.  Eardley.  Brother  Hair  acted  as 
mission  president  pro  tem.  until  the 
arrival  of  the  new  president,  Le  Grand 
Richards,  who  took  charge  Jan.  1, 1914. 

HANSINK,  Johannes  (Jan),  tempo- 
rary president  of  the  Netherlands  Mis- 
sion in  1877,  was  born  Nov.  4,  1827, 
at  Zwolle,  Holland,  a  son  of  Gerrit 
Hansink  and  Catherine  W.  Schultz. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  9,  1866,  in  the 
city  of  his  birth,  ordained  an  Elder 
May  20,  1872,  by  Sybren  van  Dyk,  and 
appointed  mission  president  pro  tem. 
June  9,  1877,  when  Peter  J.  Lammers 
I'eturned  home.  He  was  in  charge  of 
the  mission  until  Oct.  8  of  that  year, 
when  the  new  president,  Bernhard  H. 
Schettler,  arrived  in  Zwolle.  With  his 
wife,  Maria  Johanna  Fernold  (born 
Aug.  7,  1827,  at  Zwolle,  Holland,  a 
daughter  of  Hendrik  Jan  Fernold  and 
Gerardina  Visser)  Elder  Hansink — 
whose  name  is  sometimes  written  Han- 
zink — came  to  Utah  in  1878.  He  died 
April  19,  1879,  at  Salt  Lake  City. 

HOLLING,  Marcus,  president  of  the 
Netherlands  Mission  from  1867  to 
1869,  was  born  July  20,  1828,  in  Mel- 
dorf,  Holstein,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Paul 
W.  Holling  and  Anna  Laackman.    He 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


353 


was  baptized  Dec.  1,  1864,  by  John 
Sharp  (presumably  in  Salt  Lake  City) 
and  became  a  member  of  the  36th 
Quorum  of  Seven- 
^"  ty.      Formerly     he 

was  a  Lutheran 
minister  and  had 
also  been  associat- 
ed with  educational 
institutions  in  Ger- 
many, his  specialty 
being  languages 
and  higher  mathe- 
matics. He  was  set  apart  for  a  mis- 
sion to  Europe  April  21,  1867,  arrived 
in  Holland  July  7,  1867,  and  succeeded 
Francis  A.  Brown  as  president  of  the 
mission.  On  Sept.  25,  1869,  he  turned 
the  affairs  of  the  mission  over  to  Jan 
F.  Krumperman,  a  local  member,  and 
left  Holland,  but  did  not  return  to 
Utah.     He  became  an  apostate. 

HYDE,  Charles  Stanford,  president 
of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from  1923 
to  1926,  was  born  Jan.  7,  1888,  at  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  H. 
Hyde  and  Caroline 
Stanford.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  7, 
1896,  by  his  father, 
filled  a  mission  to 
the  Netherlands  in 
1907-1909,  and  an- 
other one  in  1923- 
1926,  when  he  had 
charge  of  the  mis- 
sion. On  his  sec- 
ond mission  he  was  accompanied  by  his 
wife,  Lanora  Sperry  Hyde,  who  was 
born  March  19,  1890,  at  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  William  A. 
Sperry  and  Anna  Z.  Eardley.  He 
served  as  second  counselor  in  the  pres- 
idency of  the  Pioneer  Stake,  Salt  Lake 
City,  in  1925-1929  and  as  first  coun- 
selor in  1929-1930 +  .  Elder  Hyde  is 
now  chief  clerk  in  the  Presiding  Bish- 
op's office. 

JUDD,  Asa  Walter,  president  of  the 
Netherlands     Mission    from     1895    to 


1896,  was  born  Aug.  28,  1868,  at  Eagle- 
ville.  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  now  Lincoln  Co., 
Nevada,  a  son  of  Zadok  Knapp  Judd 
and  Mary  Minerva 
'  -  -  Dart.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  28,  1877, 
by  Wm.  D.  John- 
son, jun.,  and  filled 
two  missions  to  the 
Netherlands,  the 
first  one  in  1887- 
1889,  and  the  sec- 
ond one  in  1893- 
1896.  On  his  second 
mission  he  succeeded  Edwin  Bennion 
as  president  of  the  mission  in  the 
spring  of  1895,  and  was  succeeded  by 
Geo.  S.  Spencer  the  following  year. 
Elder  Judd  was  precinct  justice  of  the 
peace  for  seven  years,  was  U.  S.  com- 
missioner, and  served  at  different 
times  as  Bishop's  counselor.  Bishop, 
High  Councilor  and  M.  I.  A.  Stake 
Board  member  in  the  Kanab  Stake. 
In  1933  Elder  Judd,  who  lives  in  Fre- 
donia,  Arizona,  filled  a  short  term  mis- 
sion to  the  Central  States. 

Koldew>Ti,    Zwier    Willem,    tempo- 
rary president  of  the  Netherlands  Mis- 
sion in  1882  and  again  from  1884  to 
1885,   was    born    March    18,    1830,   at 
Deventer,     Nether- 
lands, a  son  of  Jan 
Koldewijn  and  Eli- 
zabeth    Veugelink. 
He  was  baptized  at 
Deventer    April    7, 
1872,  by  Jan  Poor- 
te,  and  ordained  a 
Deacon      June      2, 
1872,     by     Sybren 
van     Dyk.      When 
Pres.  van  Dyk   left  Holland  in  June, 
1882,  Brother  Koldewyn  succeeded  him 
as  president  pro  tern.     The  new  presi- 
dent,   Peter    J.    Lammers,    arrived    in 
November  of  that  year,  and  when  he 
had  finished  his  mission  in  November, 
1884,  Brother  Koldewyn  again  became 
president  pro  tern.,  serving  this  time 


Vol.   IV,  No.  23 


June  5,  1936 


354 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


until  November,  1885,  when  John  W. 
F.  Volker  arrived  to  take  charge  of 
the  mission.  Zwier  Willem  Koldewyn 
died  at  Ogden,  Utah,  May  14,  1889. 

KOOYMAN,  Frank  I.,  president  of 
the  Netherlands  Mission  from  1929  to 
1933,  is  the  author  of  "De  Profeet  der 
Mormonen,  een  eerlijk  Waarheidsge- 
tuige"  (The  Mormon  Prophet  an  Hon- 
est Witness  of  Truth)  and  other  writ- 
ings in  the  Dutch  or  Netherlands  lan- 
guage.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  101.) 

KRUMPERMAN,      Jan      Frederik, 

temporary  president  of  the  Nether- 
lands Mission  from  1869  to  1871,  was 
born  Oct.  12,  1832,  at  Zwolle,  Nether- 
lands, a  son  of  Martinus  Krumperman 
and  Gerritdina  Krijnders.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  21,  1866,  ordained  an  Elder 
Nov.  14,  1868,  and  appointed  mission 
president  pro  tem.  Sept.  25,  1869,  at 
the  departure  of  Marcus  HoUing.  He 
rendered  service  until  the  arrival  of 
Sybren  van  Dyk,  who  took  charge  Dec. 
16,  1871.  Elder  Krumperman  came  to 
Utah  in  1873  and  died  in  Ogden  July 
27,  1876. 

LAMMERS,  Peter  Jacob,  president 
of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from  1875 
to  1877  and  from   1882  to  1884,  was 
born    Oct.    22,    1839,    in    Amsterdam, 
Holland,  a  son  of  Pieter  Lammers  and 
Christina    Alida    Kortman.      He    was 
baptized    June    23, 
1864,    ordained    an 
Elder  Oct.  20,  1865, 
under  the  hands  of 
Joseph  Weiler  and 
Francis  A.  Brown, 
and  set  apart  as  a 
local  missionary.  In 
this  capacity  he  la- 
bored until  Aug.  20, 
1869,  when  he  left 
Holland   as    an    emigrant    for    Utah. 
Pres.  Weiler,  reporting  his  missionary 
activities,  describes  Elder  Lammers  as 
"indefatigable  in  his  labors."   Brother 


Lammers  returned  twice  to  his  native 
land,  both  times  as  president  of  the 
mission,  and  translated  and  published 
several  small  books  and  pamphlets. 
The  first  edition  of  the  Dutch  or  Neth- 
erlands L.  D.  S.  Hymn  Book  was  also 
compiled  by  him.  He  died  March  1, 
1921,  at  Ogden,  Utah.  (See  also  Im- 
provement Era,  Vol.  24,  p.  669,  and 
the  Netherlands  Mission  "Ster,"  Vol. 
26,  pp.   120  and  127.) 

LILLYWHITE,   John   Philip,  presi- 
dent of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1920  to  1923  and  from  1926  to  1929, 
was  born  Dec.  23,  1882,  at  Greenville, 
Beaver  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son     of     Benjamin 
L  i  1 1  y  w  h  i  t  e  and 
Mary    Lewis.      He 
was  baptized  June 
1,   1893,  and    filled 
three    missions    to 
the     Netherlands, 
the     first     one     in 
1905-1907.     On    his 
second     and     third 
missions,  when  he  presided,  he  was  ac- 
companied by  his  wife,  Lillian  Dahls- 
rud  Lillywhite,  who  was  born  Feb.  8, 
1896,  at   Salina,   Sevier  Co.,  Utah,   a 
daughter    of    Andrew    Dahlsrud    and 
Anna  Jensen.     Elder  Lillywhite,  who 
is   a   teacher  by   profession,  received 
his  L.  L.  B.  from  the  American  Ex- 
tension   University    at    Los    Angeles, 
California,  in  1929,  and  his  A.  B.  de- 
gree  in   religious  education  from  the 
Brigham  Young  University  at  Provo, 
Utah,  in  1935.     He  is  principal  of  the 
Box  Elder  Seminary  at  Brigham  City, 
Utah. 

METS,  Samuel,  temporary  president 
of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from  1863 
to  1864,  was  born  Dec.  30,  1836,  at 
Zwyndrecht,  Holland,  a  son  of  Philip 
Mets  and  Leah  Ova.  He  moved  to 
Rotterdam  in  1862,  his  name  being 
entered  in  the  register  of  population 
(bevolkings  register)  July  21  of  that 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


355 


year.  About  that  time  he  accepted 
the  restored  Gospel,  which  was  intro- 
duced in  the  Netherlands  in  1861. 
When  A.  W.  van  der  Woude  left  for 
Utah  June  1,  1863,  Samuel  Mets— who 
presided  over  the  Rotterdam  branch — 
was  left  in  charge  of  the  affairs  of 
the  mission,  it  seems,  and  Joseph  Wei- 
ler,  the  next  president  sent  from  Utah, 
found  him  at  his  post  on  his  (Elder 
Weiler's)  arrival  Oct.  31,  1864.  Bro. 
Weiler  wrote  at  that  time:  "He  (Sam- 
uel Mets)  bids  me  welcome  to  all  he 
has,  and  says  as  long  as  he  has  any- 
thing I  shall  share.  I  like  his  appear- 
ance very  much,  and  he  feels  like  do- 
ing all  he  can  to  help  to  roll  on  the 
Work  in  which  he  is  engaged"  (Mill. 
Star,  Vol.  26,  p.  734).  Brother  Mets 
died  April  26,  1903,  in  Rotterdam. 

METS,  Timothy,  president  of  the 
Netherlands  Mission  from  1891-1892, 
was  born  Dec.  4,  1828,  at  Vlissingen 
(Flushing),  Holland,  a  son  of  Philip 
Mets  and  Leah  Ova.  He  was  bap- 
tized at  Rotterdam  June  10,  1862  or 
1863,  by  Paul  A. 
Schettler,  who  also 
ordained  him  an 
Elder  in  1865  at 
Salt  Lake  City.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1864,  accom- 
panying forty-six 
other  emigrants. 

Elder  Mets  as- 
sisted in  building 
Morgan  City,  Utah,  and  in  October, 
1879,  moved  to  Mesa,  Arizona,  where 
he  arrived  in  February,  1880.  His 
family,  at  that  time,  consisted  of 
twelve  souls,  including  his  wife's 
mother  and  Cornells  Dirk  and  Geertje 
van  Ek  Exalto,  whom  he  cared  for. 

Elder  Mets  left  Mesa  for  the  Neth- 
erlands (not  traveling  via  Salt  Lake 
City)  Nov.  26,  1890,  and  succeeded, 
upon  his  arrival,  Francis  A.  Brown 
as  president  of  the  mission.  During 
his   administration,   in   1891,   Belgium 


was  added  to  the  Netherlands  Mission. 
He  writes  that  he  "enjoyed  his  mis- 
sion exceedingly."  He  died  April  17, 
1911,  at  Mesa,  Arizona. 

NIBLEY,  Alexander,  president  of 
the  Netherlands  Mission  from  1906  to 
1907,  was  born  May  7,  1876,  at  Logan, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  W.  Nibley  and 
Rebecca  A.  Neibaur.  He  was  baptized 
June  10,  1884,  or- 
dained a  Seventy 
Sept.  7,  1898,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith, 
and  filled  two  mis- 
sions in  the  Neth- 
erlands, the  first 
one  in  1898-1901. 
During  his  first 
mission  he  prepar- 
ed the  music  and 
words  for  the  fourth  edition  of  the 
L.  D.  S.  Hymn  book  in  the  Dutch  or 
Netherlands  language,  in  collabora- 
tion with  Paul  Roelofs,  and  during  his 
second  mission — when  he  presided — 
he  published  the  fifth  edition  of  the 
Netherlands  L.  D.  S.  Hymn  books, 
having  prepared  the  copy  for  this  is- 
sue also  in  collaboration  with  Elder 
Roelofs. 

PETERS,  Frederik,  temporary  px-es- 
ident  of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1878  to  1880,  was  born  April  21,  1824, 
at  Zutphen,  Netherlands.    He  was  bap- 
tized June  25,  1874, 
—  at  Zutphen,  by  Ger- 

ardus  B.  Denkers 
and  was  ordained 
an  Elder  and  set 
apart  as  president 
of  the  Zutphen 
branch  May  30, 
1875.  He  was  ap- 
pointed mission 
president  pro  tern, 
by  Bei-nard  H.  Schettler  in  June,  1878, 
and  had  charge  of  the  work  in  the 
Netherlands  until  the  arrival  of  Sy- 
bren  van  Dyk,  in  May,  1880.  He  left 
Holland  Oct.  17,  1881,  as  an  emigi-ant 


356 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


for  Utah,  accompanied  by  his  wife, 
Agatha  (Aagtje)  van  Duivenbode  Pe- 
ters (born  in  March,  1825,  at  Deven- 
ter,  Netherlands)  and  four  children. 
He  died  Dec.  5,  1896,  at  Salt  Lake 
City. 

PIEPER,  Frederick,  president  of  the 
Netherlands  Mission  from  1896  to 
1897,  was  born  Sept.  24,  1872,  at 
Lunen,  Westphalia,  Germany,  a  son  of 
Godfrey  Frederick  Pieper  and  Hen- 
rietta Esselmann.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  16,  1888,  in  the  river  Scheldt 
near  Antwerp,  Bel- 
gium, by  Mischa 
Markow,  was  ap- 
pointed president 
of  the  Antwerp 
branch  Jan.  31, 
1892,  and  left  Bel- 
gium as  an  emi- 
grant for  Utah 
Sept.  1  of  that  year. 
He  was  oi'dained  a 
Seventy  and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Europe  Oct.  8,  1894,  by  Brigham 
Young,  jun.,  spent  the  winter  of  1894- 
1895  doing  missionary  work  in  Dort- 
mund, Germany,  and  arrived  in  Rot- 
terdam March  21,  1895.  After  labor- 
ing both  in  Belgium  and  Holland,  he 
succeeded  George  S.  Spencer  as  presi- 
dent of  the  mission  Dec.  1,  1896.  In 
Germany  at  the  home  of  his  father 
in  Lunen,  his  wife,  Olina  Johanson 
Pieper,  took  sick  with  bronchitis  and 
died  Jan.  23,  1895.  She  was  born 
April  15,  1870,  near  Christiania,  Nor- 
way, joined  the  Church  in  1885  and 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1889.  During 
Elder  Pieper's  sojourn  in  the  Nether- 
lands, his  mother,  Henrietta  Essel- 
mann, also  died.  Sister  Esselmann  and 
her  seven  children  were  the  first  con- 
verts to  the  Church  in  Belgium.  Her 
remarkable  conversion,  in  which  that 
equally  remarkable  missionary,  Mis- 
cha Markow,  played  such  an  extraor- 
dinary part,  forms  an  interesting  chap- 
ter in  the  history  of  the  Netherlands- 


Belgium  Mission.  Her  demise  came 
July  20,  1897,  in  the  18th  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  City,  giving  Elder  Pieper  the 
very  sad  experience  of  losing  both  his 
wife  and  his  mother  while  laboring  as 
a  missionary. 

RICHARDS,  LeGrand,  president  of 
the  Netherlands  Mission  from  1914  to 
1916,  was  born  Feb.  6,  1886,  at  Farm- 
ington,  Utah,  a  son  of  George  F.  Rich- 
ards and  Alice  A. 
Robinson.  He  was 
baptized  June  11, 
1894,  and  filled  two 
missions  to  the 
Netherlands,  the 
first  one  in  1905- 
1908.  On  his  sec- 
ond mission — when 
he  presided  —  he 
was  accompanied 
by  his  wife,  Ina  Jane  Ashton  Richards, 
who  was  born  Sept.  14,  1886,  at  Salt 
Lake  City,  a  daughter  of  Edward  T. 
Ashton  and  Cora  Lindsay.  Elder 
Richards  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  29,  1919,  by  Charles 
W.  Penrose,  and  presided  over  the 
Sugar  House  Ward,  Granite  Stake,  in 
1920-1925.  In  1926  he  filled  a  short 
term  mission  to  the  Eastern  States. 
In  1931-1933  he  presided  over  the 
Hollywood  Stake,  California,  and  was 
set  apart  Dec.  29,  1933,  to  pi-eside  over 
the  Southern  States  Mission.  (See 
Improvement  Era,  Vol.  17,  p.  250.) 

SCHETTLER,     Bernhard     Herman, 

president  of  the  Netherlands  Mission 
from  1877  to  1878,  was  born  at  Neu- 
wied,  near  Coblenz,  Prussia,  January 
19,  1833,  a  son  of  Johann  Frederick 
Augustus  Schettler  and  Caroline  L. 
Zeplin.  He  received  a  collegiate  edu- 
cation, emigrated  to  America  in  1853, 
heard  the  message  of  "Mormonism"  in 
New  York  City  and  was  baptized  there 
May  7,  1860,  by  George  Q.  Cannon.  In 
1861  he  came  to  Utah,  arriving  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  23,  of  that  year. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


357 


For  eleven  years  he  was  employed  as 
clerk  in  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  office. 
During  the  absence 
,  of  his  brother,  Paul 

-  -  A.    Schettler,    who 

made  a  trip  to  the 
Holy  Land  with  the 
so-called  Palestine 
Party  in  1872-1873, 
he  acted  in  his 
brother's  place  as 
treasurer  of  Salt 
Lake  City.  When 
Zion's  Savings  Bank  and  Trust  Com- 
pany was  first  organized  in  1873,  El- 
der Schettler  was  appointed  cashier 
of  that  institution,  a  position  he  oc- 
cupied for  many  years.  He  died  Oct. 
25,  1907,  at  Salt  Lake  City.  (See  also 
Biographical  Encyclopedia  for  the  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  page  82.) 

SCHETTLER,  Paul  August,  presi- 
dent of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1861  to  1862,  was  born  Aug.  13,  1827, 
at  Neuwied,  near  Coblenz,  Prussia,  a 
son  of  Johann  Frederick  Augustus 
Schettler  and  Friedericke  Charlotte 
Menzel.  He  emigrated  to  America  in 
1858,  accepted  the  Gospel  in  New  York 
City  and  was  baptized  there  Feb.  9, 
1860,  by  George  Q.  Cannon.  That 
same  year  he  join- 
ed the  Saints  in 
Utah  and  the  fol- 
lowing year  was  set 
apart  to  commence 
missionary  work  in 
the  Netherlands. 
With  his  compan- 
ion, A.  W.  van  der 
Woude,  he  arrived 
in  Rotterdam  Aug. 
5,  1861.  Soon  a  number  of  converts 
were  made,  and  in  May,  1862,  a  branch 
was  organized  in  Amsterdam.  In 
September,  1862,  Elder  Schettler  was 
transferred  to  Switzerland,  where  he 
could  use  his  native  tongue.  He  was 
succeeded  by  A.  W.  van  der  Woude. 
Elder  Schettler  labored  in  his  new  field 


until  1864,  when  he  was  honorably 
released.  For  twenty  years  he  was 
treasurer  of  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1872 
he  once  moi-e  visited  the  Netherlands, 
this  time  as  a  member  of  the  "Pales- 
tine Party,"  en  route  to  the  Holy  Land. 
In  July,  1874,  a  stroke  of  paralysis  dis- 
abled him,  and  he  died  Nov.  3,  1884, 
at  Salt  Lake  City.  (See  also  Swiss 
and  German  Mission.) 

SPENCER,  George  Sterling,  presi- 
dent  of  the   Netherlands    Mission   in 
1896,  was  born  Oct.  13,  1870,  at  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Claudius  V. 
Spencer  and  Matilda  Price.     He  was 
baptized  June  1,  1882,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty and  set  apart 
April  13,   1894,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant  for 
a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,    but    upon 
his  arrival  in  Eng- 
land    his     mission 
was      changed      to 
Holland,  and  when 
Asa   W.    Judd   left 
for     home     March 
30,    1896,    Brother 
Spencer  succeeded  him  as  president  of 
the  mission.     He  presided  until  Dec. 
1,  of  that  year,  when  he  was  succeeded 
by  Frederick  Pieper.     Elder  Spencer 
is    the    author,    in    collaboration  with 
Wm.  J.  DeBry,  of  "De  Verzoening  en 
het  Verlossingsplan  van  Jezus  Chris- 
tus"  (The  Atonement  and  the  Plan  of 
Redemption    of   Jesus    Christ),   an   8- 
page  tract,  and  is  the  founder  of  the 
"Ster,"  the  Netherlands  Mission  paper. 
For  many  years  he  was  a  member  of 
the  Granite  Stake  High  Council,  and 
he   has   also   acted  as   Bishop   of  the 
Forest    Dale    Ward    in    the    Granite 
Stake.      He   is  now  vice-president  of 
Zion's  Savings  Bank  and  Trust  Com- 
pany. 

THATCHER,  Brigham  Guy,  presi- 
dent of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1909  to  1911,  was  born  Sept.  10,  1870, 


358 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


at  Logan,  Utah,  a  son  of  Geoiue  W. 
Thatcher  and  Luna  C.  Young.  Ke  was 
baptized  when 
about  nin'j  yeai's 
old,  by  Anders  Pe- 
terson, was  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  and 
set  apart  for  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Nether- 
lands Aug.  13, 1897, 
by  Seymour  B. 
Young,  and  i-eturn- 
ed  July  9,  1900. 
During  his  second  mission  to  the  Neth- 
erlands in  1909-1911,  he  presided  over 
the  field.  Both  times  he  was  accom- 
panied by  his  wife,  Floi'ence  Beatie 
Thatcher,  who  was  born  Sept.  20,  1870, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  daughter  of  Hamp- 
den Sidney  Beatie  and  Marion  Mum- 
ford.  From  1906  to  1917  Elder  That- 
cher presided  as  Bishop  over  the  Lo- 
gan 1st  Ward  of  the  Logan  Stake. 

TRAYNER,  Jacob  Hampton,  presi- 
dent of  the  Netherlands  Mission  from 
1905  to  1906,  was  born  March  13,  1877, 
at  Philadelphia,  Penn.,  a  son  of  John 
Trayner  and  Anna 
Maria  Hampton. 
He  was  baptized 
Nov.  30,  1885,  by 
John  Cottam,  and 
set  apart  April  7, 
1903,  for  a  mission 
to  the  Netherlands. 
Shortly  after  his 
arrival  he  was  call- 
ed to  labor  at  the 
headquarters  of  the  mission,  and  on 
Sept.  1,  1903,  was  appointed  mission 
secretary.  In  April,  1905,  he  succeed- 
ed Willard  T.  Cannon  as  president  of 
the  mission,  and  served  till  April,  1906. 
From  1916  to  1923  he  acted  as  clerk 
of  the  Union  Stake,  Oregon.  Elder 
Taylor  is  now  manager  of  the  Latter- 
day  Saints  Hospital  at  Idaho  Falls, 
Idaho. 

VAN  DER  WOUDE,  Anne  Wiegers, 

president  of  the  Netherlands  Mission 


from  1862  to  1863,  was  born  July  12, 
1812,  at  Franeker,  in  the  Netherlands, 
a  son  of  Wieger  van  der  Woude  and 
Catherine  (Tryn^je)  Gerrits.  More 
than  likely  he  was  the  first  Nether- 
lands convert,  but  not  in  Holland.  He 
was  master  mariner  and  spoke  several 
languages,  including  Chinese,  having 
spent  five  years  in  China  after  a  ship- 
wreck in  oriental  waters.  Later  he 
became  a  ship  broker  at  Cardiff,  Wales, 
and  there  he  was  baptized  Oct.  30, 
1852,  by  George  Taylor.  On  January 
24,  1853,  he  sailed  from  Liverpool  for 
America — accompanied  by  his  wife, 
Siebregje  J.  Zwart  (born  April  14, 
1814,  at  Dokkum,  Netherlands,  a 
daughter  of  Jan  Zwart  and  Jetske 
Brouwer)  and  three  children:  Cather- 
ine (Tryntje),  Wieger  and  Jan — on 
the  "Golconda."  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  March  16, 1861,  by  John  V.  Long, 
and  April  8,  1861,  while  living  in  Og- 
den,  Utah,  he  was  set  apart  as  a  mis- 
sionary to  Holland,  where  he  arrived 
Aug.  5,  1861,  with  his  companion,  Paul 
A.  Schettler.  He  baptized  the  first 
converts  in  the  Netherlands  Oct.  1, 
1861,  at  Broek-Akkerwoude,  Friesland, 
where  an  attractive  marker  was  erect- 
ed in  the  fall  of  1936.  In  1862,  when 
Pres.  Schettler  was  transferred  to 
Switzerland,  Elder  van  der  Woude  suc- 
ceeded him.  He  returned  to  Utah  in 
1863  and  later  moved  to  Idaho,  Amer- 
icanizing his  surname  into  Vander- 
wood.  He  died  in  August,  1890,  at 
Malad,  Idaho. 

VAN  DYK,  Sybren,  president  of  the 
Netherlands  Mission  from  1871  to 
1874,  and  again  from  1880  to  1882,  was 
born  May  22,  1827,  at  Leeuwarden,  in 
the  Netherlands,  a  son  of  Roelof  van 
Dijk  and  Sjieuwke  Westra.  He  was 
baptized  May  19,  1862,  by  A.  W.  van 
der  Woude,  and  soon  was  found  as- 
sisting the  Elders  in  their  labors. 
When  in  1866  the  first  Dutch  or  Neth- 
erlands edition  of  Parley  P.  Pratt's 
"Voice  of  Warning"  was  published, 
brother    Van    Dyk's    translation    was 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


359 


used,  which  he  had  made  from  the 
German.  He  also  translated  other 
missionary  literature.  He  left  Holland 
for  Utah  in  1869, 
accompanied  by  his 
wife  and  two  chil- 
dren. In  the  fall  of 
1871  he  was  back 
in  his  native  land, 
as  a  missionary, 
having  been  set 
apart  to  preside 
over  the  mission, 
succeeding  Jan  F. 
Krumperman,  who 
had  had  temporary  charge  since  1869. 
In  collaboration  with  Johannes  H. 
Heman.  he  translated  John  Jaques' 
"Catechism  for  Children,"  which  he 
published.  During  his  second  mis- 
sion he  wrote  several  "circulating 
letters,"  calculated  to  instruct  and 
edify  the  scattered  saints.  Returning 
to  Utah  in  1882,  he  tui'ned  the  affairs 
of  the  mission  over  to  Zwier  W.  Kolde- 
wyn,  a  local  member.  Elder  Van  Dyk, 
whose  name  is  sometimes  written  Van 
Dyke  (in  Dutch  van  Dijk),  died  Nov. 
29,  1899,  at  Loa,  Utah. 


(the  first  edition  in  the  Dutch  lan- 
guage,) being  published  in  1890,  after 
Elder  Volker's  i-eturn  home. 

Shortly  before  his  death.  Elder  Vol- 
ker  sojourned  once  more  in  the  Neth- 
erlands for  some  time,  visiting  rela- 
tives and  the  places  where  he  had 
laboi'ed  as  a  missionary.  He  died 
March  8,  1932,  at  his  home  in  Ogden, 
Utah. 

WALKER,  James  H.,  president  pro 
tem.    of   the   Netherlands    Mission   in 
1909,  was  born  May  31,  1885,  at  Coal- 
ville,   Summit   Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Rob- 

Ck  ert     Walker     and 
^^&       Jane   Wright.      He 
— •"  i^™       filled  a  mission  to 

the  Netherlands  in 
1907-1910  and  had 
temporary  charge 
of  the  affairs  of  the 

-.   ..       -  mission  between 

the  administrations 
of  Sylvester  Q.  Cannon  and  Brigham 
G.  Thatcher.  Elder  Walker  is  now 
Bishop  of  the  Raymond  2nd  Ward, 
Taylor  Stake,  Canada. 


VOLKER,  John  W.  F.,  president  of 
the  Netherlands  Mission  from  1885  to 
1889,  was  born  Aug.  5,  1859,  at  Am- 
sterdam,  Netherlands,   a   son   of   Jan 
Willem        Frederik 
Volker    and    Anna 
Catherina  Scherre- 
witz.     He  was  bap- 
tized March  6,  1877, 
by    Peter   J.    Lam- 
mers,  and  filled  two 
missions     to     the 
Netherlands,     the 
first    one    in    1882- 
1883.  Elder  Volker, 
on  his  second  mission,  translated  Par- 
ley  P.    Pratt's    "Voice    of    Warning" 
and  also  the  Book  of  Mormon  into  the 
Dutch   or    Netherlands    language,   the 
first  book  coming  off  the  press  in  its 
second  edition  in  1889,  the  latter  work 


WEILER,  Joseph,  president  of  the 
Nethei'lands     Mission    from     1864    to 
1867,  was  born  Nov.  17,  1836,  in  Ches- 
ter  County,   Penn., 
a     son     of     Jacob 
Weiler    and    Anna 
Maria    Malin.     He 
was   set   apart   for 
his    mission    April 
22,  1864,  and  land- 
ed    in     Rotterdam 
Oct.  31,  1864,  hav- 
ing labored  in  Eng- 
land    first.       With 
the  arrival  of  Elder  Weiler,  the  Neth- 
erlands, which  had  theretofore  formed 
a  part  of  the  Swiss  and  German  Mis- 
sion, became  a  separate  mission.    (See 
also    "Historical    Record",    Vol.    5,    p. 
32.) 


360 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


New  Zealand   Mission 

Presidents:  Ezra  F.  Richards,  1897- 
1898;  Ezra  T.  Stevenson,  1898-1900; 
John  Ephraim  Magleby,  1900-1903; 
Charles  B.  Bartlett,  1903-1905;  Louis 
G.  Hoagland,  1905-1907;  Rufus  K. 
Hardy,  1907-1909;  George  Bowles, 
1909-1911;  Orson  D.  Romney,  1911- 
1914;  William  Gardner,  1914-1918; 
James  N.  Lambert,  1918-1920;  Fred- 
erick W.  Schwendiman,  May-Novem- 
ber, 1920;  George  Shepherd  Taylor, 
1920-1923;  Angus  T.  Wright,  1923- 
1925;  Andrew  Reed  Halversen  (act- 
ing), May-August,  1925;  John  How- 
ard Jenkins,  1925-1928;  John  Eph- 
raim Magleby  (second  term),  1928- 
1930. 

BARTLETT,  Charles  Bart,  presi- 
dent of  the  New  Zealand  Mission  from 
1903  to  1905,  was  born  Aug.  27,  1869, 
in  Mountain  Dell,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Charles  C.  Bartlett  and  An- 
na K.  Jensen.  He  was  baptized  July 
21,  1878,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood 
and  filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand 
in  1892-1896.  He  was  set  apart  for  a 
second  mission  to  New  Zealand,  June 
20,  1902,  to  preside  over  the  mission, 
and  arrived  in  Auckland  Aug.  12, 
1902,  having  spent  three  weeks  in  the 
Hawaiian  Mission.  Being  honorably 
released  he  returned  home  in  1905. 

GARDNER,  William,  president  of 
the  New  Zealand  Mission  from  1914 
to  1918,  died  Feb.  4,  1932,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  379.) 

Previously  (from  1893  to  1896)  he 
had  presided  over  the  Australian  Mis- 
sion.    (See  page  307.) 

HALVERSON,  Andrew  Reed,  act- 
ing president  of  the  New  Zealand  Mis- 
sion in  1925,  was  born  Nov.  3,  1901, 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thom- 
as Halvei'son  and  Emma  H.  Otteson. 
He  was  baptized  June  4,  1910,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  in 
1922-1926,  acting  as  president  of  the 
Mission  from  May  10  to  Aug.  16,  1925. 


HARDY,  Rufus  K.,  president  of  the 
New  Zealand  Mission  from  1907  to 
1909.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  97.) 


HOAGLAND,  Louis  G.,  president 
of  the  New  Zealand  Mission  from 
1905  to  1907.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
2,  p.   365.) 


JENKINS,  John  Howard,  president 
of  the  New  Zealand  Mission  from  1925 
to  1928,  was  born  Aug.  1,  1886,  in 
Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Jen- 
kins and  Harriet  Riley.     He  was  bap- 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


361 


tized  Oct.  4,  1894,  filled  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand  in  1906-1910,  and  a  sec- 
ond mission  in  1925  to  act  as  presi- 
dent of  the  mission.  He  arrived  in 
New  Zealand  Aug.  16,  1924,  and  de- 
parted for  his  home  in  Utah  May 
8,    1928. 

LAMBERT,  James  N.,  president  of 
the  New  Zealand  Mission  from  1918 
to  1920,  died  Sept.  12,  1927.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  137.) 

MAGLEBY,  John  Ephraim,  presi- 
dent of  the  New  Zealand  Mission  from 
1900  to  1903,  and  from  1928  to  1930, 
was  born  Nov.  27,  1862,  in  Salt  Lake 


City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Hans  O.  Magle- 
by  and  Marie  Christensen.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  moved 
to  Monroe,  Sevier  Co.,  in  1875,  mar- 
ried Jane  A.  Warnock,  June  12,  1885, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand 
in  1885-1889.  He  labored  as  a  home 
missionary  in  the  Sevier  Stake  from 
1889  to  1890,  and  was  called  on  a  sec- 
ond mission  to  New  Zealand  to  act  as 
president,  he  having  acquired  the 
Maori  language  to  a  high  degree  of 


perfection  on  his  first  mission.  Elder 
Magleby  acted  as  president  of  the  Se- 
vier Stake  from  1921  to  1928.  His 
wife  served  for  four  and  a  half  years 
in  the  New  Zealand  Mission  with  her 
husband.  They  are  the  parents  of 
nine  children:  five  girls  and  four  boys. 

ROMNEY,  Orson  D.,  president  of 
the  New  Zealand  Mission  from  1911 
to  1914.   (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  60.) 


STEVENSON,  Ezra  T.,  president  of 
the  New  Zealand  Mission  from  1898  to 
1900.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  500.) 


362 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


SCHWENDIMAN,  Fred  W.,  presi- 
dent of  the  New  Zealand  Mission  in 
1920.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  506.) 

TAYLOR,  George  Shepherd,  presi- 
dent of  the  New  Zealand  Mission  from 
1920  to  1923,  was  born  July  16,  1860, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
George  Hamilton  Taylor  and  Elmina 
Shepherd.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  3, 
1868,  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  16,  1876, 
by  Angus  M.  Cannon,  married  Teenie 
Smoot  Feb.  9,  1882,  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Oct.  7,  1884,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  filled  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand  in  1884-1888.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  19,  1896, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith.  His  wife  died 
March  2,  1904,  and  he  later  married 
Priscilla  Smith.  He  is  the  father  of 
six  children. 


Eastern  States  in  1902-1904,  and  was 
set  apart  for  his  second  mission  June 
11,  1929,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 


North   Central   States   Mission 

Presidents:  John  G.  Allred,  1925- 
1929;    Arthur  Welling,    1929-1934. 

ALLRED,  John  Gurnett,  president 
of  the  North  Central  States  Mission 
from  1925  to  1929,  was  born  Sept.  11, 
1876,  in  Lehi,  Utah,  a  son  of  James 
Henry  Allred  and  Kate  Jones.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  2,  1884,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1908-1909, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1911, 
by  Heber  S.  Allen,  in  the  Taylor 
Stake,  Canada,  and  served  as  Bishop 
of  the  Raymond  1st  Ward  from  1915 
to  1919.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Can- 
ada in  1919-1922,  and  when  the  North 
Central  States  Mission  was  organized 
July  12,  1925,  he  was  sustained  as 
pi-esident  of  that  mission.  He  was 
honorably  released  May  14,  1929. 

WELLING,  Arthur,  president  of  the 
North  Central  States  Mission  from 
1929  to  1934,  was  born  Dec.  18,  1877, 
in  Farmington,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Job  Y.  Welling  and  Marietta 
Holmes.     He   filled  a  mission  to   the 


Northern  States  Mission 

Presidents:  Cyrus  H.  Wheelock^ 
1878-1879;  William  Moroni  Palmer, 
1880-1889;  John  E.  Booth,  acting,  1883- 
1884;  Dennis  E.  Harris,  pro  tem.,. 
1888-1889;  John  E.  Booth,  1889-1890; 
Charles  W.  Stayner,  1890-1893;  David 
F.  Stout,  1893-1894;  Joshua  Reuben 
Clark,  1895-1896;  Samuel  G.  Spencer, 
in  1896;  Louis  A.  Kelsch,  1896-1901; 
Walter  C.  Lyman,  1901-1902;  Asahel 
H.  Woodruff,  1902-1904;  German  E. 
Ellsworth,  1904-1919;  Winslow  Farr 
Smith,  1919-1923;  John  H.  Taylor, 
1923-1929;  Noah  S.  Pond,  1929-1931. 

BOOTH,  John  E.,  president  of  the 
Northern  States  Mission  from  1883  to 
1884,  and  from  1889  to  1890,  died 
March  28,  1920,  in  Provo,  Utah.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  494.) 

CLARK,  Joshua  Reuben,  president 
of  the  Northern  States  Mission  from 
1895  to  1896,  died  July  25,  1929.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  49.) 

LYMAN,  Walter  C,  president  of  the 
Northern  States  Mission  from  1901  to 
1902.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  154.) 

PALMER,  William  Moroni,  presi- 
dent of  the  Northern  States  Mission 
from  1880  to  1889.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  4,  p.  108.) 

POND,  Noah  S.,  president  of  the 
Northern  States  Mission  from  1929  to 
1931.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  314.) 

SMITH,  Winslow  Farr,  president  of 
the  Northern  States  Mission  from 
1919  to  1923,  was  born  Jan.  19,  1881, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John   Henry   Smith   and   Sarah   Farr. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


363 


He  was  baptized  Jan.  20,  1881),  filled  a 
mission  to  Germany  in  1902-1905,  was 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Northern 
States  Mission  June  8,  1919,  and  re- 
turned to  Utah  Feb.  1,  1923.  (See  also 
Ensign  Stake.) 

SPENCER,  Samuel  George,  presi- 
dent of  the  Northern  States  Mission 
from  1895  to  1896,  was  born  Feb.  14, 
1864,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Daniel  Spencer  and  Mary  Jane  Cut- 
cliffe.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  19,  1877, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1885-1887,  and  was  set  apart  as 
pi-esident  of  the  Northern  States  Mis- 
sion Jan.  4,  1895.  He  returned  home 
Dec.  3,  1896. 

STAYNER,  Charles  W.,  president 
of  the  Northern  States  Mission  from 
1890  to  1893,  was  born  June  21,  1840, 
in  London,  England,  a  son  of  Thomas 
C.  Stayner  and  Elizabeth  Pill.  He 
came  to  Utah  at  the  age  of  fourteen, 
was  baptized  in  1855,  filled  two  mis- 
sions to  Great  Britain,  the  last  one  in 
1880-1882;  was  set  apart  Oct.  8,  1889, 
for  a  mission  to  the  Northern  States 
and  acted  as  president  of  the  mission 
from  1890  to  1893.  He  returned  home 
April  18,  1894,  and  died  Dec.  26,  1899, 
in  East  Bountiful,  Utah. 

STOUT,  David  Fisk,  president  of  the 
Northern  States  Mission  from  1893  to 
1894,  was  born  Feb.  3,  1855,  in  Center- 
ville,  Utah,  a  son  of  Allen  Joseph  Stout 
and  Amanda  Melvina  Fisk.  He  was 
baptized  in  1864,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Western  States  in  1886-1888,  migrated 
to  Mexico  with  his  family  in  1900,  and 
after  the  exodus  in  1912  he  spent  six 
years  in  Arizona.  He  was  called  to 
preside  over  the  Northern  States  Mis- 
sion in  March,  1893,  and  returned  in 
1894.  Elder  Stout  died  Oct.  1,  1932,  in 
Logan,  Utah. 

TAYLOR,  John  H.,  president  of  the 
Northern  States  Mission  from  1923  to 
1929.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  72.) 


WHEELOCK,  Cyrus  Hubbard,  presi- 
dent of  the  Northern  States  Mission 
from  1878  to  1879,  was  born  Feb.  28, 
1813,  in  Henderson,  Jefferson  Co.,  N. 
Y.,  a  son  of  Asa  Wheelock  and  Lucy 
Hubbard.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  1, 
1839,  filled  a  mission  to  Vermont,  and 
other  missions  to  the  States  in  early 
days.  His  labor  with  Governor  Ford 
in  behalf  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
and  others,  while  they  were  incarcer- 
ated in  Carthage  jail,  is  a  matter  of 
history.  He  was  a  gifted  orator,  and 
was  set  apart  May  6,  1878,  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Northern  States  Mission, 
then  comprising  Michigan,  Wisconsin, 
Minnesota,  Iowa  and  Illinois.  He  re- 
tui'ned  in  August,  1879,  and  died  Oct. 
11,  1894,  in  Mt.  Pleasant,  Utah. 

WOODRUFF,  Asahel  H.,  president 
of  the  Northern  States  Mission  from 


1902  to  1904.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  284.) 


Northwestern  States  Mission 

Presidents:  George  C.  Parkinson, 
general  director,  1897-1898;  Lewis  S. 
Pond,  local  assistant  to  President  Park- 
inson; Franklin  S.  Bramwell,  1898- 
1902;  Nephi  Pratt,  1902-1909;  Melvin  J. 


364 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Ballard,  1909-1919;  Heber  C.  Iverson, 
1919-1923;  Brigham  S.  Young,  1923- 
1927;  William  R.  Sloan,  1927-1934. 

BALLARD,  Melvin  J.,  president  of 
the  Northwestern  States  Mission  from 


1909  to  1919.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  419,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  744.) 

BRAMWELL,  Franklin  S.,  president 
of   the   Northwestern    States    Mission 


from  1898  to   1902. 
Vol.  1,  p.  771.) 


(See  Bio.  Ency., 


PARKINSON,  George  C,  president 
of  the  Oneida  Stake,  who  supervised 
the  opening  of  the  Northwestern  States 
Mission  in  1897  and  1898,  died  July  6, 
1920,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  438.) 

PRATT,  Nephi,  president  of  the 
Northwestern  States  Mission  from 
1902  to  1909,  was  born  Jan.  1,  1846,  in 
Nauvoo,  Hancock  Co.,  Illinois,  a  son 
of  Parley  P.  Pratt  and  Belinda  Mar- 
den.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his 
parents  in  1848,  was  baptized  in  1854, 
filled  a  mission  to  Europe  in  1867-1870, 
was  appointed  president  of  the  North- 
western States  Mission  March  15, 1902, 
and  set  apart  May  6,  1902.  He  was 
released  March  14,  1909,  and  died  April 

29,  1910,  in  Spokane,  Washington. 

SLOAN,  Walter  Reed,  president  of 
the  Northwestern  States  Mission  from 
1927  to  1934,  was  born  March  30,  1881, 
in  Manti,  Utah,  a  son  of  Hugh  Russell 
Sloan  and  Margaret  V.  Reed.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  4,  1889,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1900-1902, 
was  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Northwestern  States  Mission  Nov.  19, 
1926,  and  arrived  in  the  mission  Nov. 

30,  1926.  Prior  to  this  he  had  acted 
as  Bishop  of  the  Logan  2nd  Ward  in 
Utah  from  1911  to  1916. 

YOUNG,  Brigham  Spencer,  presi- 
dent of  the  Northwestern  States  Mis- 
sion from  1923  to  1927,  was  born  Dec. 
29,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Brigham  Young,  jun.,  and  Cath- 
erine C.  Spencer.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  was  a  member 
of  the  old  Home  Dramatic  Club,  also 
of  the  Salt  Lake  Opera  Company,  that 
gave  so  many  delightful  performances 
in  the  famous  Salt  Lake  Theatre.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  Europe  in  1878-1880, 
was  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Northwestern  States  Mission  July  23, 
1922,  and  was  released  in  the  early 
part  of  1927. 


I 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


365 


Norwegian  Mission 

Presidents:  August  S.  Schou,  1920- 
1923;  Albert  R.  Petersen,  1923-1926; 
Martin  Christoffersen,  1926-1927;  Lo- 
renzo W.  Anderson,  1927-1929;  Hyrum 
D.  Jensen,  1929-1933. 

ANDERSON,       Lorenzo      William, 

president  of  the  Norwegian  Mission 
from  1927  to  1929,  was  born  March 
10,  1875,  in  Bear  River  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Nephi  P.  Anderson  and  Marie 
Katrine  Jensen.  He  was  baptized 
March  24,  1883,  ordained  a  Seventy 
July  20,  1900,  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Norway  in  1900- 
1903,  laboring  in  Copenhagen  and  Ice- 
land. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  4,  1904,  by  Lucius  A.  Snow.  On 
Dec.  11,  1907,  he  married  Sarah  Olive 
Mason,  and  was  set  apart  for  a  second 
mission  to  Norway  Oct.  7,  1926,  this 
time  to  preside  over  the  Mission. 

CHRISTOFFERSON,  Martin,  presi- 
aent  of  the  Norwegian  Mission  from 
1926  to  1927.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  617.) 

JENSEN,  Hyrum  Daniel,  president 
of  the  Norwegian  Mission  from  1929 
to  1933,  was  born  Feb.  22,  1868,  in 
Franklin,  Idaho,  a  son  of  David  Jensen 
and  Serena  Peterson.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  2,  1878,  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia Feb.  8,  1895,  by  B.  H.  Roberts; 
filled  a  second  mission  to  Scandinavia 
in  1911-1913.  April  2,  1929,  he  was  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Norwegian 
Mission  and  was  honorably  released 
Aug.  30,  1933.  His  wife,  Margaret  A. 
Jensen  (born  Aug.  10,  1864,  at  Kays- 
ville,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Alfred  Alder 
and  Susan  Field)  accompanied  Elder 
Jensen  on  his  third  mission  as  a  mis- 
sionary. 

SCHOU,  August  S.,  president  of  the 
Norwegian  Mission  from  1920  to  1923. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  767.) 


PETERSON,  Albert  Richard,  presi- 
dent of  the  Norwegian  Mission  from 
1923  to  1926,  was  born  Sept.  8,  1882, 
in  Richfield,  Utah,  a  son  of  Ole  Peter- 
sen and  Julie  Marie  Hansen.  He  was 
baptized  March  2,  1892,  ordained  an 


Elder  May  2,  1905,  by  Joseph  S.  Home, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Norway  in  1905- 
1907.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  9,  1914,  by  Heber  J.  Grant  and 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Storrs  Ward, 
Carbon  Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to 
1923.    He  married  Margaret  M.  Bernt- 


366 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


sen  May  20,  1908,  and  was  set  apart 
March  9, 1923,  to  preside  over  the  Nor- 
wegian Mission. 


Samoan  Mission 

Presidents:  Kimo  Belie,  1863-1876; 
Samuela  Monoa  (a  native  of  Hawaii), 
1876-1888;  Joseph  H.  Dean,  1888-1890; 
William  O.  Lee,  1890-1892;  George  E. 
Browning,  1892-1893;  Ransom  M.  Stev- 
ens, 1893-1894;  Thomas  H.  Hilton, 
1894-1895;  John  W.  Beck,  1895-1896; 
Orlando  Barrus,  April-December,  1896; 
Edward  J.  Wood,  December,  1896-1899; 
William  L.  Worsencroft,  January-May, 
1899;  William  G.  Sears,  1899-1902; 
Joseph  H.  Merrill,  1902-1903;  Martin 
F.  Sanders,  1903-1905;  Thomas  F. 
Court,  1905-1908;  William  A.  Moody, 
1908-1912;  Christian  Jensen,  1912- 
1913;  John  A.  Nelson,  jun.,  1913-1916; 
Ernest  Wright,  1916-1918;  Willard  A. 
Keith,  1918-1920;  John  Q.  Adams, 
1920-1924;  Ernest  LeRoy  Butler,  1924- 
1927;  Willard  L.  Smith,  1927-1934. 

ADAMS,  John  Q.,  president  of  the 
Samoan  Mission  from  1920  to  1924. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  1.) 

BARRUS,  Orlando,  president  of  the 
Samoan  Mission  in  1896,  was  born  May 
29,  1870,  in  Grantsville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
B.  F.  Barrus  and  Lovinia  Ann  Steele. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  set  apart  Aug.  11,  1893,  for  a  mis- 
sion to  Samoa  and  returned  Jan.  20, 
1897.  He  acted  as  president  of  the 
mission  from  April  19  to  Dec.  25,  1896. 

BECK,  John  Waldemar,  pi-esident  of 
the  Samoan  Mission  from  1895  to  1896, 
was  born  Jan.  10, 1869,  in  Paris,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  Anders  Beck  and  Sophia  C. 
Hanson.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  6, 1876, 
and  was  set  apart  for  his  mission  to 
Samoa  Dec.  30,  1892.  He  acted  as 
president  of  the  mission  from  March 
23,  1895,  to  April  19,  1896,  and  re- 
turned home  May  12,  1896. 


BROWNING,  George  E.,  president 
of  the  Samoan  Mission  from  1892  to 
1893.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  329.) 

BUTLER,  Ernest  LeRoy,  president 
of  the  Samoan  Mission  from  1924  to 
1927,  was  born  Feb.  13,  1885,  in  Ogden, 
Utah,  a  son  of  M.  W.  Butler  and  Ma- 
tilda Stowell.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
26,  1893,  filled  his  first  mission  to 
Samoa  in  1909-1912,  and  was  set  apart 
for  a  second  mission  to  Samoa  Nov.  1, 
1921. 

COURT,  Thomas  Samuel,  president 
of  the  Samoan  Mission  from  1905  to 
1908,  was  born  March  4,  1871,  at  West 
Jordan,  Utah,  a  son  of  Owen  T.  Court 
and  Louisa  S.  Swinyard.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  4,  1879,  filled  a  mission  to 
Samoa  in  1893-1896,  and  was  set  apart 
for  a  second  mission  to  Samoa  Sept. 
2,  1904. 

DEAN,  Joseph  Henry,  president  of 
the  Samoan  Mission  from  1888  to  1890, 
was  born  Oct.  16,  1855,  in  Taunton, 
Somersetshire,  England,  a  son  of  Jos- 
eph Dean  and  Catherine  Knott.  He 
was  baptized  in  1863,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Sandwich  Islands  in  1877-1881, 
was  called  again  to  fill  a  mission  to  the 
Sandwich  Islands,  being  set  apart  May 
21,  1887,  and  was  called  from  Hawaii 
June  18,  1888,  to  open  up  the  work  in 
Samoa.  He  arrived  in  Samoa  June 
17,  1888,  with  his  wife  and  child,  and 
was  released  July  14,  1890,  sailing  for 
home  Aug.  16,  1890. 

HILTON,  Thomas  H.,  president  of 
the  Samoan  Mission  from  1894  to  1895, 
was  born  Dec.  6,  1870,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  David  Hilton  and 
Mary  Ann  Affleck.  He  was  baptized 
March  1,  1881,  and  set  apart  March 
25,  1892,  for  a  mission  to  Samoa;  he 
arrived  April  17,  1892,  and  on  April 
28,  1894,  Ransom  M.  Stevens,  presi- 
dent of  the  Samoan  Mission,  died. 
Bro.  Hilton  was  made  president  July 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


367 


12,  1894,  by  appointment  from  the 
First  Presidency  and  returned  to  his 
home  in  Utah  Aug.  16,  1895. 

JENSEN,  Christian,  jun.,  president 
of  the  Samoan  Mission  from  1912  to 
1913,  was  born  Nov.  17,  1868,  in 
Ephraim,  Utah,  a  son  of  Christian  and 
Barbara  Jensen.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission 
to  Samoa  in  1894-1897,  and  was  set 
apart  for  a  second  mission  to  Samoa 
Nov.  21,  1911,  to  act  as  president  of 
the  Mission. 

KEITH,  Willard  Augustus,  presi- 
dent of  the  Samoan  Mission  from 
1918  to  1920,  was  born  July  26,  1886, 
in  Havelock,  Canada,  a  son  of  Asa  H. 
Keith  and  Elmina  Freeze.  He  was 
baptized  March  6,  1914,  and  set  apart 
Nov.  1,  1916,  for  a  mission  to  Samoa. 

LEE,  William  Orme,  president  of  the 
Samoan  Mission  from  1890  to  1892, 
was  born  Nov.  28,  1862,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Alfred  G.  Lee  and 
Rebecca  Orme.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  set  apart  Sept.  11, 
1888,  for  a  mission  to  Samoa,  arriving 
there  Oct.  10,  1888.  Bro.  Jos.  H.  Dean 
was  released  July  14,  1890,  and  Brother 
Lee  succeeded  him  as  president  of  the 
mission.  Elder  Lee  was  released  and 
sailed  for  home  Feb.  4,  1892,  on  the 
ship  "Mariposa". 

MERRILL,  Joseph  Harris,  president 
of  the  Samoan  Mission  from  1902  to 
1903,  was  born  March  10,  1868,  in 
Smithfield,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Horatio  Harris  Merrill  and  Martha 
Mouritsen.  He  was  baptized  July  5, 
1877,  filled  a  mission  to  Samoa  in  1891- 

1893,  and  another  one  in  1902  to  the 
same  field,  to  act  as  president  of  the 
mission.  He  was  set  apai-t  Nov.  30, 
1901  and  returned  Feb.  12,  1903.  He 
married  Katie  Eliza  Hale  Sept.  6,  1889, 
who  died  June  29,  1890.    On  June  21, 

1894,  he  married  Grace  Emma  Hale. 
They  are  the  parents  of  nine  children. 


MOODY,  William  A.,  president  of 
the  Samoan  Mission  from  1908  to  1912. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  195.) 

NELSON,  John  A.,  jun.,  president  of 
the  Samoan  Mission  from  1913  to  1916, 
was  born  Sept.  13,  1889,  in  Smithfield, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Alexander  Nelson 
and  Ella  E.  Thomas.  He  was  baptized 
in  1897,  was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Samoa  Jan.  21,  1910,  and  returned 
April  25,  1916. 

SANDERS,  Martin  F.,  president  of 
the  Samoan  Mission  from  1903  to  1905, 
was  born  Nov,  16,  1874,  in  Fairview, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Moses  M.  Sanders,  jun., 
and  Elizabeth  Ellen  Cheney.  He  was 
baptized  in  July,  1883,  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Samoa  June  18,  1899,  and 
returned  Dec.   19,  1904. 

SEARS,  William  Gailey,  president 
of  the  Samoan  Mission  from  1899  to 
1903,  was  born  Feb.  17,  1873,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Isaac  Sears 
and  Sarah  Jane  Gailey.  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  17,  1881,  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Nov.  11,  1893,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant,  and  set  apai-t  for  his  first  mis- 
sion to  Samoa,  where  he  labored  until 
1896.  He  was  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Mission  April  14,  1899,  and  re- 
turned home  in  1903. 

SMITH,  Willard  Lisbon,  president 
of  the  Samoan  Mission  from  1927  to 
1934,  was  born  Sept.  2,  1891,  in  Farm- 
ington,  Utah,  a  son  of  Willard  G.  Smith 
and  Mariah  Lamb.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  3,  1900,  filled  a  mission  to  Samoa 
in  1915-1920,  and  was  set  apart  to 
preside  over  that  Mission  Dec.  9,  1926. 

STEVENS,  Ransom  M.,  president  of 
the  Samoan  Mission  from  1893  to 
1894.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  722.) 

WOOD,  Edward  J.,  president  of 
the  Samoan  Mission  from  1896  to  1899. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  111.) 


368 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


WORSENCROFT,  William  Lorenzo, 

president  of  the  Samoan  Mission  in 
1899,  was  born  Oct.  11,  1869,  in  Payson, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Samuel  Worsencroft 
and  Jane  Hardy.  He  was  baptized  Dec. 
17,  1877,  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
Samoa  Dec.  5,  1896;  was  appointed 
president  of  the  Mission  in  January, 
1899,  and  was  released  Jan.  26,  1900. 

WRIGHT,  Ernest,  president  of  the 
Samoan  Mission  from  1916  to  1918,  was 
born  April  9,  1874,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Joseph  Wright  and  Elizabeth 
Westwood.  He  was  baptized  in  1884, 
filled  a  mission  to  Samoa  in  1896-1899, 
and  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1904-1906.  He  was  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Samoan  Mission  Feb.  2, 
1916,  and  returned  home  April  3,  1918. 


Scandinavian    Mission 

Comprising  Denmark,  Sweden  and 
Norway. 

Presidents:  Erastus  Snow,  1850- 
1852;  John  E.  Forsgren,  in  1852;  Wil- 
lard  Snow,  1852-1853;  John  Van  Cott, 
1853-1856;  Hector  C.  Haight,  1856- 
1858;  Carl  Widerborg,  1858-1860; 
John  Van  Cott  (second  term),  1860- 
1862;  Jesse  N.  Smith,  1862-1864; 
Samuel  L.  Sprague,  pro  tem.,  April 
to  August,  1864;  Carl  Widerborg  (sec- 
ond term),  1864-1868;  Jesse  N.  Smith 
(second  term),  1868-1870;  William  W. 
Cluff,  1870-1871;  Canute  Peterson, 
1871-1873;  Christian  G.  Larsen,  1873- 
1875;  Nils  C.  Flygare,  1875-1876;  Ola 
N.  Liljenquist,  1876-1877;  August  W. 
Carlson  pro  tem.,  1877-1878;  Nils  C. 
Flygare  (second  term),  1878-1879; 
Niels  Wilhelmsen,  1879-1881;  Andrew 
Jenson,  pro  tem.,  in  1881;  Christian 
D.  Fjeldsted,  1881-1884;  Anthon  H. 
Lund,  1884-1885;  Nils  C.  Flygare 
(third  term),  1885-1888;  Christian  D. 
Fjeldsted  (second  term),  1888-1890; 
Edward  H.  Anderson,  1890-1892;  Jo- 
seph Christiansen,  1892-1893;  Carl  A. 


Carlquist,  1893-1894;  Peter  Sundwall, 
1894-1896;  Christian  N.  Lund,  1896- 
1898;  George  Christensen  in  1898;  An- 
dreas Peterson,  1898-1901;  Anton  L. 
Skanchy,  1901-1904;  Christian  D. 
Fjeldsted   (third  term),  1904-1905. 

ANDERSON,  Edward  H.,  president 
of  the  Scandinavian  Mission  from  1890 


to  1892,  died  Feb.  1,  1928,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  715.) 

CARLSON,  August  Wilhelm,  presi- 
dent, pro  tem.,  of  the  Scandinavian 
Mission  from  1877  to  1878,  was  born 
Aug.  28,  1844,  in  Karlskrona,  Sweden, 
the  son  of  C.  G.  Carlson  and  Mary 
Lundgren.  He  was  baptized  May  15, 
1863,  labored  in  the  Goteborg  Confer- 
ence in  1864-1865,  in  the  office  in  Co- 
penhagen in  1865-1866,  and  in  the 
"Millennial  Star"  office  in  Liverpool, 
England,  in  1867  and  1871.  He  came 
to  Utah  in  December,  1871.  Being 
called  on  a  special  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia for  the  purpose  of  translating 
the  Book  of  Mormon  into  the  Swed- 
ish language,  he  left  Salt  Lake  City 
in  August,   1877.     He  performed  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


369 


mission  faithfully,  and  before  his  re-      to   1894.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p. 
turn  an  edition  of  2,000  copies  of  the      422.) 

CHRISTENSEN,  George,  president 
of  the  Scandinavian  Mission  in  1898. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  370.) 


book  was  published.  He  returned  to 
Utah  in  January,  1878,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest,  May  8,  1881.  He 
died  July  8,  1911,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

CARLQUIST,  Carl  A.,  president  of 
the  Scandinavian   Mission   from   1893 


CLUFF,   William   W.,  president  of 
the   Scandinavian  Mission  from   1870 


to  1871,  died  Aug.  21,  1915,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  340.) 

CHRISTIANSEN,  Joseph,  president 
of    the    Scandinavian    Mission    from 


Vol.  IV,  No.  24 


June  13.  1936 


370 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


1892  to  1893,  was  born  Aug,  17,  1854, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Niels  C.  and  Catherine  Christiansen. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  ordained  an  Elder  in  January, 
1876,  was  married  to  Hannah  M.  Pe- 
tersen, Jan.  31,  1876,  and  moved  to 
Mayfield,  Utah,  being  one  of  the  pio- 
neer settlers  of  that  place.  In  1888 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
acted  as  second  counselor  to  Bishop 
Ole  C.  Olsen.  In  1891-1893  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia,  presiding 
fifteen  months  over  the  Aarhus  Con- 
ference, Denmark,  and  for  nearly  a 
year  was  president  of  the  Scandinav- 
ian Mission.  He  died  at  Mayfield, 
March  6,  1895.  (See  History  of  the 
Scandinavian  Mission,  p.  327.) 

FJELDSTED,      Christian      Daniel, 

president  of  the  Scandinavian  Mission 
from  1881  to  1884,  from  1888  to  1890 


Ogden,   Utah. 
1,  p.  461.) 


(See   Bio.   Ency.,   Vol. 


and  from  1904  to  1905,  died  Dec.  23, 
1905,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  203,  and  Vol.  3, 
p.  746.) 

FLYGARE,  Nils  C,  president  of  the 
Scandinavian  Mission  from  1875  to 
1876,  from  1878  to  1879,  and  from 
1885  to   1888,  died  Feb.   19,   1908,  in 


FORSGREN,  John  Erik,  president 
of  the  Scandinavian  Mission  in  1852, 
was  born  Nov.  7,  1816,  at  Gefle,  Swe- 


den, the  son  of  John  0.  Forsgren  and 
Anna  Christina  Olson.  His  early  life 
was  spent  as  a  sailor.  At  the  age 
of    20    years    he    became    acquainted 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


371 


with  the  Latter-day  Saints  in  Boston, 
Mass.,  where  he  was  baptized  July 
16,  1843.  He  went  to  Nauvoo  in  1844, 
and  became  acquainted  with  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  He  served  as 
a  member  of  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
marched  to  California,  and  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  1847.  In  1849- 
1853  he  filled  a  mission  to  Scandina- 
via and  baptized  the  first  convert  to 
the  Church  in  that  country,  his  own 
brother,  Peter  Adolph  Forsgren,  July 
26,  1850.  He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Jan.  22,  1890,  a  non-member  of  the 
Church. 

HAIGHT,  Hector  C,  president  of 
the  Scandinavian  Mission  from  1856 
to  1858,  died  June  26,  1879,  in  Farm- 
ington,  Davis  Co.,  Utah.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  387:) 


JENSON,    Andrew,    president,    pro 
tern.,  of  the  Scandinavian  Mission  in 


Elder  Haight  was  a  Utah  pioneer  of 
1847,  who  had  crossed  the  plains  in 
Perregrine  Sessions'  Fifty  of  Orson 
Spencer's  Hundred.  He  was  the  first 
settler  of  Farmington,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  but  by  a  change  in  the  boun- 
dary lines  between  Farmington  and 
Kaysville  his  farm  on  Haight's  Creek 
became  a  part  of  Kaysville,  where  his 
son,  the  late  Judge  Haight,  resided 
for  many  years. 


1881.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  261, 
and  Vol.  3,  p.  752.) 


LARSEN,    Christian    G.,    president 
of  the  Scandinavian  Mission  from  1873 


to  1875,  died  June  1,  1911,  in  Castle 
Dale,  Emery  Co.,  Utah.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  523.) 


372 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


LILJENQUIST,   Ola  Nilson,   presi-  LUND,   Christian   N.,   president  of 

dent    of    the     Scandinavian    Mission      the   Scandinavian  Mission  from   1896 


from  1876  to  1877,  died  April  24,  1906, 
in  Rexburg,  Idaho.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  1,  p.  814.) 

LUND,  Anthon  H.,  president  of  the 
Scandinavian  Mission  from  1884  to 
1885,  died  March  2,  1921,  in  Salt  Lake 


to  1898,  died  May  7,  1921,  in  Mount 
Pleasant,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  339.) 


PETERSON,  Andreas,  president  of 
the   Scandinavian   Mission  from   1898 


City,  Utah.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  161,  and  Vol.  3,  p.  753.) 


to  1901,  died  Dec.  14,  1918,  in  Logan, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
3,  p.  690.) 


i 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


373 


PETERSON,    Canute,    president   of  SMITH,  Jesse  N.,  president  of  the 

the   Scandinavian   Mission   from    1871       Scandinavian    Mission    from    1862    to 


to   1873,  died  Oct.   14,  1902,  in   Eph- 

raim,   Sanpete   Co.,   Utah.     (See   Bio.       1864,  died  June  5,  1906,  in  Snowflake, 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  362.)  Arizona.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 

316.) 

SKANCHY,  Anton  L.,  president  of 
the   Scandinavian   Mission  from   1901  SNOW,    Erastus,   president   of   the 

Scandinavian    Mission    from    1850    to 
1852.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  103.) 


to  1904,  died  April  19,  1914,  in  Logan, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  422.) 


374 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


SNOW,  Willard,  president  of  the 
Scandinavian  Mission  from  1852  to 
1853,  was  born  May  6,  1811,  in  St. 
Johnsbury,  Caledonia  Co.,  Vermont,  the 
son  of  Levi  and  Lucina  Snow,  and  a 
brother  of  Erastus  Snow.  He  was 
baptized  June  18, 1833,  by  Orson  Pratt, 
and  moved  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in  1834, 
was  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp  in  1834, 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  28,  1835, 
and  performed  several  missions  to 
different  parts  of  the  United  States. 


SUNDWALL.    Peter,    president    of 
the   Scandinavian   Mission   from   1894 


to  1896,  died  July  17,  1925,  in  Holla- 
day,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  724.) 

VAN  COTT,  John,  president  of  the 
Scandinavian    Mission    from    1853    to 


He  arrived  in  the  Valley  in  1847,  and 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  Europe  in 

1851.  While  laboring  as  a  missionary 
in  England,  he  was  called  to  preside 
over    the     Scandinavian     Mission     in 

1852.  He  died  on  the  North  Sea  en 
route  from  Denmark  to  England  Aug. 
21,  1853. 


SPRAGUE,  Samuel  Lindsay,  presi- 
dent, pro  tem.,  of  the  Scandinavian 
Mission  in  1864,  was  born  March  23, 
1843,  in  Lowell,  Norfolk  Co.,  Mass., 
came  to  Utah  in  1848,  was  baptized 
in  1851,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1863-1866,  presiding  over  the  mission 
a  short  time  in  1864.  He  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  May  11,  1900. 


1856  and  from  1860  to  1862.    (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  198,  and  Vol.  2,  p.  727.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


375 


WIDERBORG,  Carl,  president  of 
the  Scandinavian  Mission  from  1858 
to  1860,  died  March  12,  1869,  in  Og- 
den.  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  814.) 


Elder  Widerborg  was  one  of  the 
most  successful  missionaries  and  one 
of  the  ablest  and  most  fluent  speakers 
known  in  the  Scandinavian  Mission. 

WILHELMSEN,  Niels,  president  of 
the  Scandinavian  Mission  from  1879 
to  1881,  died  Aug.  1,  1881,  in  Copen- 


hagen, Denmark.  He  was  the  first 
Elder  from  Zion  who  died  in  Scandi- 
navia.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  564.) 


Society   Islands   Mission 

Presidents:  Noah  Rogers,  1844- 
1845;  Addison  Pratt,  1845-1847;  Ben- 
jamin F.  Grouard,  1847-1850;  Addison 
Pratt  (second  term),  1850-1852;  Na- 
tive Elders,  1852-1892;  Joseph  W. 
Damron,  January- June,  1892;  James 
S.  Brown,  1892-1893;  Joseph  W.  Dam- 
ron (second  term),  1893-1895;  Frank 
Cutler,  1895-1896;  Daniel  T.  Miller, 
1896-1899;  William  H.  Chamberlain, 
1899-1900;  Joseph  Y.  Haight,  1900- 
1902;  Edward  S.  Hall,  1902-1905; 
Franklin  J.  Fullmer,  pro  tem.,  July- 
October,  1905;  Edward  S.  Hall  (sec- 
ond term),  1905-1907;  Frank  Cutler 
(second  term),  1907-1908;  William  A. 
Seegmiller,  1908-1911;  Franklin  J. 
Fullmer,  1911-1914;  Ira  Hyer,  1914- 
1915;  Ernest  C.  Rossiter,  1915-1919; 
Leonard  John  McCullough,  1919-1920; 
Leonidas  Hamlin  Kennard,  1920-1922; 
Ole  B.  Peterson,  1922-1925;  Herbert 
B.  Foulger,  1925-1926;  Stanley  W. 
Bird,  pro  tem.,  from  April  to  May,  1926; 
William  Burbidge,  1929-1933. 

BIRD,  Stanley  William,  president 
of  the  Society  Islands  Mission  in  1926, 
was  born  May  6,  1900,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  James  Albert 
Bird  and  Isabella  Singleton.  He  was 
baptized  June  3,  1908,  and  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  the  Society  Islands, 
Nov.  19,  1923. 

BROWN,  James  S.,  president  of  the 
Society  Islands  Mission  from  1892  to 
1893.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  30.) 

BURTON,  Alma  Gardner,  president 
of  the  Society  Islands  Mission  from 
1926  to  1929,  was  born  Dec.  4,  1895, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Willard  C.  Burton  and  Mary  Jane 
Gardner.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  5, 
1903,  set  apart  for  his  first  mission 
to  the  Society  Islands,  Nov.  3,  1915, 
and  returned  in  1919.  He  was  called 
to  the  Society  Islands  to  preside  over 
the  mission  in  1926. 


376 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


BURBIDGE,  George  Wm.,  president 
of  the  Society  Islands  Mission  from 
1929  to  1933,  was  born  Sept.  2,  1896 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
George  E.  Burbidge  and  Minnie  M. 
Brinton.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  2, 
1904,  set  apart  July  13,  1915,  for  a 
mission  to  the  Society  Islands,  and 
returned  in  1919.  He  was  called  on 
a  second  mission  to  the  islands  in 
1929,  this  time  to  preside. 


FULLMER,  Franklin  Junius,  presi- 
dent, pro  tern.,  of  the  Society  Islands 
in  1905,  and  president  from  1911  to 
1914,  was  born  March  25,  1882,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Da- 
vid Fullmer  and  Caroline  M.  Linnell. 
He  was  baptized  April  1,  1890,  and  set 
apart  for  a  mission  to  the  Society 
Islands  May  23,  1904.  He  was  set 
apart  for  a  second  mission  to  the 
islands  Oct.  8,  1906. 


CHAMBERLAIN,  William  H.,  jun., 

president  of  the  Society  Islands  Mis- 
sion from  1899  to  1900,  was  born  Feb. 
12,  1870,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Wm.  H.  Chamberlain  and  Fian- 
ces H.  Jones.  He  was  baptized  in 
1879,  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Islands  June  23,  1897,  and  returned 
May  11,  1900. 

CUTLER,  Frank,  president  of  the 
Society  Islands  Mission  from  1895 
to  1896,  was  born  Feb.  3,  1871,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Cut- 
ler and  Sarah  Atkinson.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  the  Society  Islands 
Feb.  24,  1893,  and  returned  in  1896. 

DAMRON,  Joseph  W.,  president  of 
the  Society  Islands  Mission  in  1892 
and  again  from  1893  to  1895,  was 
born  June  9,  1866,  at  Petersburg,  Mil- 
lard Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Damron  and  Margaret  P.  Freeman. 
He  was  baptized  June  9,  1874,  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  set  apart  for 
his  mission  Nov.  7,  1891,  by  Abraham 
H.  Cannon,  and  returned  June  17, 
1895. 

FOULGER,  Herbert  Brown,  presi- 
dent of  the  Society  Islands  Mission 
from  1925  to  1926,  was  born  May  14, 
1906,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of  Her- 
bert B.  Foulger  and  Pearl  Brown.  He 
was  baptized  June  7,  1914,  and  set 
apart  for  his  first  mission  to  the  So- 
ciety Islands  April  10,  1902.  He  was 
set  apart  for  a  second  mission  to  the 
same  islands  March  2,  1923, 


GROUARD,  Benjamin  F.,  president 

of  the  Society  Islands  Mission  from 
1847  to  1850.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  639.) 

HAIGHT,  Joseph  Young,  president 
of  the  Society  Islands  Mission  from 
1900  to  1902,  was  born  Oct.  9,  1865, 
in  Farmington,  Utah,  the  son  of  Hor- 
ton  D.  Haight  and  Louisa  Leavitt.  He 
was  baptized  July  5,  1872,  set  apart 
for  his  mission  April  10,  1899,  and  re- 
turned in  September,  1902. 

HALL,  Edward  S.,  president  of  the 
Society  Islands  Mission  from  1902  to 
1905,  and  from  1905  to  1907,  was  born 
July  13,  1881,  in  Sugar  House  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Hall  and  Emma  Spackman.  He  was 
baptized  July  13,  1889,  was  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  the  Society  Islands 
Oct.  24,  1900,  and  returned  in  1907. 

HYER,  Ira,  president  of  the  Society 
Islands  Mission  from  1914  to  1915, 
was  born  Feb.  8,  1889,  in  Lewiston, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Andrew  L.  Hyer  and 
Ellen  Gilbert.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
5,  1897,  and  set  apart  for  his  mis- 
sion Jan.  31,  1912. 

KENNARD,      Leonidas     H.,     jun., 

president  of  the  Society  Islands  Mis- 
sion from  1920  to  1922,  was  born  Oct. 
26,  1869,  in  Farmington,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Leonidas  H.  Kennard,  sen.,  and 
Joanah  Louisa  Gleason.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1877,  set  apart  for  his  first 
mission  July  2,  1896,  and  returned 
home  in  1899.    He  was  set  apart  Jan. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


377 


9,  1920,  as  president  and  returned  in 
1922.    (See  also  Bear  River  Stake.) 

McCULLOUGH,     Leonard     John, 

president  of  the  Society  Islands  Mis- 
sion from  1919  to  1920,  was  born  May 
8,  1897,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  S.  McCullough  and  Edna 
Susan  Chugg.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  and  was  set  apart 
for  his  mission  Nov.  20,   1917. 

MILLER,  Daniel  T.,  president  of 
the  Society  Islands  Mission  from  1896 
to  1899,  was  born  May  15,  1870,  in 
Farming-ton,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jacob 
Miller  and  Helen  Mar  Cheney.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  13,  1878,  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  June  18,  1896,  by 
Franklin  D.  Richai'ds,  married  Har- 
riet Knowlton  June  25,  1896,  and  be- 
came president  of  the  Society  Islands 
Mission  that  same  year.  While  in  that 
mission  he  ti'anslated  the  Book  of  Mor- 
mon into  the  Tahitian  language.  In 
1899  to  1902  he  held  the  chair  of  lan- 
guages at  the  Brigham  Young  Col- 
lege, Logan,  and  served  on  the  Stake 
Board  of  the  Cache  Stake  Sunday 
Schools.  The  Book  of  Mormon  was 
published  in  the  Tahitian  language  in 
1903,  and  in  1906  Elder  Miller  held  the 
chair  of  history  in  the  B.  Y.  College. 
His  wife  died  Aug.  5,  1898,  while  he 
was  on  a  mission  in  the  Society  Is- 
lands. He  died  in  April,  1919,  at  Pla- 
cerville,   California. 

PETERSON,  Ole  Bertrand,  presi- 
dent of  the  Society  Islands  Mission 
from  1922  to  1925,  was  born  Sept.  7, 
1889,  in  Lehi,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
R.  Peterson  and  Agnes  E.  Sorenson. 
He  was  baptized  July  2,  1899,  was  set 
apart  Oct.  11,  1910,  for  his  first  mis- 
sion and  retui-ned  in  1914.  He  was 
called  on  a  second  mission  to  the  So- 
ciety Islands  June  30,  1922,  this  time 
to  preside.    He  returned  home  in  1925. 

PRATT,  Addison,  president  of  the 
Society  Islands  Mission  from  1845  to 


1847,    and   from    1850    to    1852.     (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  698.) 

ROGERS,  Noah,  president  of  the 
Society  Islands  Mission  from  1844  to 
1845,  was  born  March  17,  1797,  in 
Bethlehem,  Litchfield  Co.,  Conn.,  the 
son  of  Philemon  and  Sarah  Rogers. 
He  was  baptized  in  Februai-y,  1837, 
and  was  from  that  time  until  the  day 
of  his  death  an  active  member  of  the 
Church.  In  company  with  his  brother 
Chandler  Rogers,  and  Silas  Smith,  he 
started  for  Far  West,  Mo.,  and  at  the 
conference  held  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  in 
April,  he  was  called  on  a  mission  to 
Vermont  with  Addison  Pratt  and  four 
others.  In  a  council  meeting  held 
May  11,  1843,  in  Nauvoo,  he  was  called 
to  fill  a  mission  to  the  Pacific  Isles, 
and  was  set  apart  on  May  23,  1843, 
for  that  mission.  He  remained  one 
year  on  the  Islands  and  returned  to 
Nauvoo  Dec.  29,  1845,  in  time  to  join 
the  Saints  in  their  exodus  from  Illi- 
nois. He  died  at  Mount  Pisgah,  Iowa, 
May  31,  1846,  while  journeying  to- 
ward the  West. 

ROSSITER,  Ernest  Crabtree,  presi- 
dent of  the  Society  Islands  Mission 
from  1915  to  1919,  was  born  Oct.  16, 
1882,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  A.  Rossiter  and  Eliza  Ann 
Crabtree.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Jan.  10,  1905,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Netherlands  in  1905-1907.  In  1907- 
1908  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States.  He  acted  as  president  of 
the  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  in  the  10th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  married  Venus  Robin- 
son, June  28,  1911,  was  called  to  pre- 
side over  the  Tahitian  Mission  or  So- 
ciety Islands  Mission  in  1915,  and  left 
home  with  his  wife  Feb.  17,  1915;  he 
returned  in  January,  1920. 

SEEGMILLER.  William  A.,  presi- 
dent of  the  Society  Islands  Mission 
from  1908  to  1911.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  2,  p.  707.) 


378 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


South  African  Mission 

Presidents:  Jesse  Haven,  1853- 
1855;  local  Elders,  1855-1857;  Ebenez- 
er  C,  Richardson,  1857-1861;  William 
Fotheringham,  1861-1864;  Miner  G. 
Atwood,  1864-1865;  (There  was  no 
mission  in  South  Africa  from  1865  to 
1903);  Warren  H.  Lyon,  1903-1906 
Ralph  A.  Badger,  1906-1908;  Henry 
S.  Steed,  1908-1909;  Brigham  A.  Hen- 
dricks, 1909-1912;  Frank  J.  Hewlett, 
1912-1914;  Nicholas  G.  Smith,  1914- 
1921;  J.  Wyley  Sessions,  1921-1926; 
Samuel  Martin,  1926-1929;  Don  Mack 
Dalton,  1929-1935. 

ATWOOD.  Miner  G.,  president  of 
the  South  African  Mission  from  1864 
to  1865,  was  born  March  18,  1823,  in 
Mansfield,  Connecticut,  a  son  of  Dan- 
iel Atwood  and  Polly  Sawyer.  He 
embraced  the  Gospel  on  July  21,  1849, 
being  baptized  by  Cyril  Brown;  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1850,  crossing  the 
plains  in  Wilford  Woodruff's  com- 
pany. He  was  chosen  counselor  to 
Bishop  Leonard  G.  Hardy  of  the  Salt 
Lake  City  12th  Ward  in  1856,  went  on 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1857,  and  was  set  apart  for  a  mission 
to  South  Africa  May  11,  1862;  he  re- 
turned in  June,  1865.  His  last  mis- 
sion was  to  Arizona  in  1874.  He  was 
a  member  of  the  High  Council  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  of  Zion,  being  called 
to  that  position  at  the  April  Confer- 
ence in  1869.  He  died  May  17,  1887, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

BADGER,  Ralph  A.,  president  of 
the  South  African  Mission  from  1906 
to  1908,  was  born  April  8,  1880,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Rod- 
ney C.  Badger  and  Louisa  Noble  Ash- 
by.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1888, 
set  apart  for  his  mission  March  10, 
1905,  and  returned  July  10,  1908. 

DALTON,  Don  Mack,  president  of 
the  South  African  Mission  froiii  1929 
to  1935,  was  born  May  12,  1895,  in 
Manassa,   Colorado,  the   son   of  John 


C.  Dalton  and  Hannah  Daphne  Smith. 
He  was  baptized  May  12,  1903,  and 
later  ordained  a  High  Priest.  He  was 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  South 
African  Mission  Jan.  2,  1929;  return- 
ed July  14,  1935. 

FOTHERINGHAM,  William,  presi- 
dent   of   the    South    African    Mission 


from  1861  to  1864,  died  Feb.  27,  1913, 
in  Milford,  Beaver  Co.,  Utah.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  190.) 

HAVEN,  Jesse,  president  of  the 
South  African  Mission  from  1853  to 
1855,  was  born  March  28,  1814,  in 
Holliston,  Middlesex  Co.,  Mass.,  a  son 
of  John  Haven  and  Betsy  Howe.  He 
was  baptized  April  13,  1838,  by  Elder 
Joseph  Ball,  was  with  the  Saints  in 
their  persecutions  and  expulsion  from 
the  State  of  Missouri;  was  ordained 
an  Elder  Jan.  10,  1839,  by  Brigham 
Young,  and  at  a  conference  held 
March  19,  1841,  he  was  called  to  fill  a 
mission  in  the  Eastern  States.  On 
Nov.  24,  1842,  he  married  Martha  S. 
Hall;  emigrated  to  Nauvoo  from  Mas- 
sachusetts, and  when  the  14th  quo- 
rum of  Seventy  was  organized  he 
was  ordained  one  of  the  presidents 
of  that  quorum.  He  filled  another 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  from 
which    he  returned   to   Utah   in    1850. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


379 


In  August,  1852,  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  South  Africa,  arriving  at 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  April,  1853. 
He  returned  from  Africa  in  Decem- 
ber, 1855,  by  way  of  England.  Being 
sent  to  Scotland  to  labor  as  a  mis- 
sionary he  remained  there  until  May, 
1856.  He  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Dec.  15,  1856.  Elder  Haven  died  Dec. 
13,  1905,  at  Peterson,  Morgan  Co., 
Utah,  and  was  buried  in  Salt  Lake 
City. 

HENDRICKS,  Brigham  A.,  presi- 
dent of  the  South  African  Mission 
from  1909  to  1912.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  2,  p.  639.) 

LYON,  Warren  H.,  president  of  the 
South  African  Mission  from  1903  to 
1906.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol  4,  p.  38.) 


RICHARDSON,  Ebenezer  C,  presi- 
dent of  the  South  African  Mission 
from  1857  to  1861,  was  called  at  the 
April  conference,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  to  fill  a  mission  to  Europe. 
He  arrived  in  Liverpool  Aug.  4,  1857, 
and  was  appointed  Aug.  22,  1857,  to 
labor  in  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  Col- 
ony, South  Africa.  He  sailed  for  Af- 
rica Sept.  29,  1857. 

SESSIONS,  J.  Wyley,  president  of 
the  South  African  Mission  from  1921 
to  1926,  was  born  Dec.  11,  1885,  in 
Marion,  Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
Harvey  Sessions  and  Alice  Bryson. 
He  was  baptized  in  July,  1894,  was  set 
apart  Nov.  9,  1920,  for  a  mission  to 
South  Africa,  and  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  South  African  Mission  in 
London,  England,  in  January,  1921, 
by  Apostle  George  Albert  Smith. 


>?  rm^^ 


MARTIN,  Samuel,  president  of  the 
South  African  Mission  from  1926  to 
1929,  was  born  Jan.  26,  1875,  in  Stam- 
bourne,  Essex,  England,  the  son  of 
Isaac  Martin  and  Emily  Rollerson. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  20,  1904,  and 
was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  South 
Africa  April  27,  1926,  and  returned 
in  1929. 


SMITH,  Nicholas  G.,  president  of 
the  South  African  Mission  from  1914 
to  1921.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  167.) 

STEED,  Henry  Lee,  president  of 
the  South  African  Mission  from  1908 
to  1909,  was  born  July  11,  1862,  in 
Farmington,  Utah,  the  son  of  Henry 
Steed  and  Lydia  Rebecca  Reed.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
and  was  set  apart  Jan.  30,  1908,  for 
his  mission  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 


South  American  Mission 

Presidents:  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  1925- 
1926;  K.  B.  Reinhold  Stoof,  1926-1935. 
Prior  to  this  (in  1851-1852),  Apostle 
Parley  P.  Pratt  and  Elder  Rufus  Allen 
filled  a  short  mission  to  South  Amer- 
ica. 

STOOF,  K.  B.  Reinhold,  president 
of  the  South  American  Mission  from 
1926  to  1935,  was  born  Jan.  12,  1887, 
at  Plauveninsel,  Prussia,  Germany,  a 
son  of  Frederick  W.  Stoof  and  Karo- 
line  Schuler.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
21,    1907,    set    apart   for    his    mission 


380 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


May  4,  1926,  and  returned  Oct.  16, 
1935.  He  was  accompanied  by  his 
wife,  Martha  F.  E.  Stoof,  a  daughter 
of  Paul  Hurte  and  Pauline  Stiller, 
who  was  born  Oct.  1,  1900,  at  Seifers- 
dorf,  Prussia,  Germany. 

BALLARD,  Melvin  J.,  president  of 
the    South    American    Mission    from 


Dec.  6,  1925,  to  July  23,  1926.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  419,  and  Vol.  3, 
p.  744.) 


Southern  States  Mission 

Presidents:  Henry  G.  Boyle,  1875- 
1878;  John  Morgan,  1878-1888;  Wil- 
liam Spry,  1888-1891;  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball, 1891-1894;  Elias  S.  Kimball, 
1894-1898;  Benjamin  E.  Rich,  1898- 
1902;  EphraimH.  Nye,  1902-1903; 
Benjamin  E.  Rich  (second  term),  1903- 
1908;   Charles  A.  Callis,  1908-1934. 

The  Middle  States  Mission  was  or- 
g'anized  from  a  part  of  the  Southern 
States  Mission  in  1902,  but  was  united 
again  with  the  Southern  States  Mis- 
sion in  1903. 

BOYLE,  Henry  Green,  president  of 
the  Southern  States  Mission  from 
1875  to  1878,  was  born  March  7,  1824, 
in  Tazewell  County,  Vii'ginia,  the  son 
of  John  Boyle  and  Jane  E.  Taylor.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  20,  1843,  came  to 
Nauvoo,   111.,   from   Virginia   in    1845, 


after  laboring  about  a  year  as  a  mis- 
sionary. He  enlisted  as  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion  in  July,  1846, 
and  marched  all  the  way  to  Califor- 
nia as  a  private  in  Company  C;  re- 
enlisted  and  served  another  eight 
months,  and  then  came  to  the  Valley. 
In  1851  he  went  with  Elders  Amasa 
M.  Lyman  and  Charles  C.  Rich  to  San 
Bernardino,  and  was  one  of  the 
founders  of  that  colony.  He  returned 
to  Utah  and  filled  seven  missions  to 
the  Southern  States,  bringing  a  com- 
pany of  converts  back  with  him  each 
time.  Elder  Boyle  filled  fourteen 
missions  in  all.  He  died  in  Novem- 
ber, 1908,  in  Arizona.  (See  also  Pio- 
neers and  Prominent  Men  of  Utah, 
p.  766.) 

CALLIS,  Charles  A.,  president  of 
the  Southern  States  Mission  from 
August,    1908,    until    February,    1934, 


was  born  May  4,  1865,  in  Dublin,  Ire- 
land, the  son  of  John  Callis  and  Su- 
sannah Charlotte  Quilliam.  His  fa- 
ther died  when  he  was  a  boy  and  his 
widowed  mother  moved  to  Liverpool, 
England,  whei'e  Charles  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old.  The  family 
came  to  Utah  in  October,  1875,  and 
resided  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  for  about 
two  years,  then  moved  to  Centerville, 
Utah,  and  later  moved  to  Coalville, 
Utah.  During  the  winter  of  1892- 
1893,  Brother  Callis  devoted  all  his 
time  for  five  months  filling  a  mission 
in  Wyoming,  which  at  that  time  was 
a    part    of    Summit    Stake.      In    1893 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


381 


Elder  Callis  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  England,  and  while  there  acted  as 
president  of  the  Irish  Conference.  On 
his  return  to  Utah  he  was  appointed 
stake  superintendent  of  the  Y,  M.  M. 
I.  A.  of  Summit  Stake  and  acted  in 
that  capacity  for  nine  years.  On  Sep- 
tember, 1902,'  he  married  Grace  E. 
Pack,  a  daughter  of  Ward  E.  Pack; 
eight  children  are  the  fruit  of  this 
union.  In  1906  Elder  Callis  and  his 
wife  were  called  on  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States.  They  laboi'ed  in 
Florida,  over  which  conference  Elder 
Callis  presided.  In  August,  1908,  while 
he  was  presiding  over  the  South  Caro- 
lina Conference,  he  was  appointed  to 
succeed  Pres.  Benjamin  E.  Rich  as 
president  of  the  Southern  States  Mis- 
sion. Although  he  had  no  time  to 
practice  law  while  serving  as  mission 
president  he  was  admitted  to  the  Bar 
in  South  Carolina  and  Florida.  This 
gave  him  prestige  and  admitted  him 
to  circles  which  otherwise  he  never 
could  have  entered.  His  wife  was 
president  of  the  Relief  Societies  in 
the  Southern  States  for  nineteen 
years.  On  Oct.  6,  1933,  Elder  Callis 
was  chosen  as  one  of  the  Council  of 
the  Twelve  Apostles  and  ordained  to 
that  office  Oct.  14,  1933,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant.  During  his  residence  in  Sum- 
mit County  he  occupied  the  following 
offices  respectively:  Constable,  mem- 
ber of  the  city  council  of  Coalville, 
representative  to  the  Utah  Legisla- 
ture, city  attorney  of  Coalville  and 
county  attorney  of  Summit  County, 

MORGAN,  John,  president  of  the 
Southern  States  Mission  from  1878 
to  1888,  died  Aug.  14,  1894,  at  Pres- 
ton, Idaho.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  204.) 

RICH,  Benjamin  E.,  president  of 
the  Southern  States  Mission  from 
1898  to  1902,  and  from  1903  to  1908. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  206.) 

KIMBALL,  Ellas  S.,  sen.,  president 
of  the  Southern  States  Mission  from 


1894  to  1898,  died  June  13,  1934,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  2,  p.  55.) 


KIMBALL,  J.  Golden,  president  of 
the    Southern     States     Mission    from 


1891   to   1894. 
1,  p.  210.) 


(See   Bio.   Ency.,  Vol. 


SPRY,  William,  president  of  the 
Southern  States  Mission  from  1888 
to  1891,  was  born  Jan.  11,  1864,  in 
Windsor,  Berkshire,  England,  the  son 
of  Philip  Spry  and  Sarah  Field.  At 
the  age  of  eleven  years  he  came  to 
Utah  with  his  parents;  was  ordained 
to   the   Priesthood   and   called  to   the 


382 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Southern  States  on  a  mission  when 
21  years  of  age.  He  labored  as  a  mis- 
sionary for  six  years,  the  last  four  of 
which  he  had  charge  of  the  Mission, 
which  then  comprised,  all  the  states 
south  of  the  Mason  and  Dixon  Line. 
In  1890,  he  was  released  long  enough 
to  marry  Mary  Alice  Wrathall  with 
whom  he  raised  an  interesting  fam- 
ily. He  began  his  political  life  in 
1894,  when  he  was  elected  county  col- 
lector of  Tooele  County.  In  1902  he 
went  to  the  State  Legislature,  was 
appointed  a  member  of  the  State 
Board  of  Land  Commissioners  in 
March,  1905,  and  later  made  president 
of  that  body.  In  the  fall  of  1908,  he 
was  elected  Governor  of  the  State  of 
Utah,  and  was  elected  to  serve  a  sec- 
ond term.  He  was  appointed  Com- 
missioner of  the  General  Land  Office 
in  1921  by  Pres.  Warren  G.  Harding, 
and  died  in  Washington,  D.  C,  April 
22,  1929. 


Southwestern  States  Mission 

Presidents:  William  T.  Jack,  1898- 
1900;  James  G.  Duff  in,  1900-1904. 

DUFFIN,  James  G.,  president  of 
the  Southwestern  States  Mission 
from  1900  to  1904,  died  May  20,  1921. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  537.) 

JACK,  William  T.,  president  of  the 
Southwestern  States  Mission  from 
1898  to  1900,  died  Dec.  15,  1934.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  304.) 


Swedish  Mission 

Presidents:  Peter  Mattson,  1905- 
1908;  Peter  Sundwall,  1908-1910;  An- 
dreas Peterson,  1910-1912;  Theodore 
Johnson,  1912-1913;  Theodore  Tobia- 
son,  1913-1916;  Anders  (Andrew)  P. 
Anderson,  1916-1919;  Theodore  Tobia- 
son  (second  term),  1919-1921;  Oscar 
W.  Soderberg  (pro  tern.)  1921;  Isaac 


P.  Thunell,  1921-1922;  Gideon  N.  Hul- 
terstrom,  1922-1923;  Hugo  D.  E.  Pe- 
terson, 1923-1925;  John  H.  Anderson, 
1925-1926;  Andrew  Johnson,  1926- 
1927;  Gideon  N.  Hulterstrom  (second 
term),  1927-1932. 

ANDERSON,   Anders  Peter,  presi- 
dent   of    the    Swedish    Mission    from 


1916  to  1919.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  290.) 

ANDERSON,  John  H.  president  of 
the    Swedish    Mission    from    1925    to 

1926.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  767.) 

JOHNSON,    Andrew,    president    of 
the    Swedish    Mission   from    1926    to 

1927,  was  born  Aug.  9,  1871,  in  Hagg- 
linge,  Malmohus  Ian,  Skane,  Sweden, 
a  son  of  Jons  Swenson  and  Elna 
Pearson.  He  was  baptized  March  31, 
1917,  in  Utah,  to  which  state  he  mi- 
grated from  Nebraska  in  1892,  having 
left  his  native  land,  the  same  year. 
In  1897  he  married  Ellen  Anderson, 
and  made  his  home  in  Murray,  Utah, 
where  he  still  resides.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Sweden  in  1925-1927,  laboring 
first  in  Skane,  and  later  acted  as  as- 
sistant editor  of  "Nordstjarnan,"  the 
last  year  of  his  mission  acting  as 
president  of  the  Swedish  Mission,  sue- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


383 


ceeding  Pres.  John  H.  Anderson.   El- 
der   Johnson    has    presided    over    the 


He  filled  another  mission  to  Sweden 
in  1927-1932,  when  he  again  presided 
over  the  mission.     He  has  also  sei'ved 


Scandinavian  organization  in  the 
Murray  Second  Ward.  (See  History 
of  the  Scandinavian  Mission,  p.  481.) 

JOHNSON,  Andrew  Theodore,  pres- 
ident of  the  Swedish  Mission  from 
1912  to  1913,  was  born  Jan.  2,  1881, 
in  Wanship,  Summit  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Andrew  Johnson  and  Emma  Ras- 
mussen.  He  was  baptized  May  1,  1890, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Sweden  in  1910- 
1913,  about  a  year  of  which  time  he 
presided  over  the  mission.  He  resides 
in  Vernal,  Uintah  Co.,  Utah.  (See 
History  of  the  Scandinavian  Mission 
p.  418.) 

HULTERSTROM,  Gideon  N.,  presi- 
dent of  the  Swedish  Mission  from 
1922  to  1923,  and  from  1927  to  1932, 
was  born  Oct.  31,  1885,  at  Vintrosa, 
Sanna,  Orebro,  Sweden,  was  bap- 
tized June  30,  1894,  and  came  to 
America  in  1902.  In  1908  he  married 
Miss  Signe  V.  Lindskog,  also  from 
Sweden.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Swe- 
den in  1908-1911,  and  again  in  1920- 
1923,  the  last  eight  months  of  which 
he  acted  as  president  of  the  mission. 


as  a  counselor  to  the  president  of  the 
Swedish  organization  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  (See  History  of  the  Scandinavi- 
an Mission,  p.  471.) 

MATTSON,  Peter,  president  of  the 
Swedish  Mission  from  1905  to  1908, 
died  March  1,  1919,  in  Mount  Pleas- 
ant, Sanpete  Co.,  Utah.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  370.) 

PETERSON,  Andreas,  president  of 
the  Swedish  Mission  from  1910  to 
1912,  died  in  Logan,  Cache  Co.,  Utah. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  690.) 

PETERSON,  Hugo  D.  E.,  president 
of  the  Swedish  Mission  from  1923  to 
1925.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  159.) 

SODERBERG,  Oscar  Wilhelm,  pres- 
ident, pro  tem.,  of  the  Swedish  Mission 
in  1921,  was  born  May  26,  1855,  in 
Goteborg,  Sweden,  a  son  of  Andei'S 
Jonsson  and  Anna  Johanna  Anderson. 
He  married  Emma  Karolina  Erikson 
in  1878,  joined  the  Church  in  1894, 
and  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1903.  He 
filled  missions  to  Sweden  in  1915- 
1917,    and    in    1919-1921,   both   times 


384 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


writing  for  "Nordstjarnan,"  the  mis- 
sion periodical,  and  for  about  six 
months  of  the  latter  period  had  tem- 
porary charge  of  the  mission  during 
the  absence  in  Utah  of  Pres.  Theo- 
dore Tobiason.  Elder  Soderberg  died 
Dec.  10,  1935,  in  Salt  Lake  City.  (See 
History  of  the  Scandinavian  Mission, 
p.  466.) 

SUNDWALL,  Peter,  president  of 
the  Swedish  Mission  from  1908  to 
1910,  died  July  17,  1925,  in  Holladay, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  3,  p.  724.) 

THUNELL,  Isaac  Peter,  president 
of  the  Swedish  Mission  from  1921  to 
1922,  was  born  in  Stockholm,  Sweden, 


May  2,  1886,  and  emigrated  to  Utah 
the  same  year  with  his  pai'ents,  Jo- 
han  Frederik  Thunell  and  Erika  Chris- 
tina Forsberg.  He  was  baptized  June 
4,  1895,  filled  a  mission  to  Sweden  in 
1900-1909,  and  held  positions  in  Sun- 
day school  and  Mutual  Improvement 
association  in  the  ward  in  which  he 
resided  in  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1921- 
1922,  Elder  Thunell  filled  another  mis- 
sion to  Sweden,  part  of  the  time  act- 
ing as  secretary  of  the  mission,  and 
later  succeeding  Theodore  Tobiason 
as   mission   president.     This   position 


he  held  about  sixteen  months  before 
returning  home.  He  served  as  Bishop 
of  the  Wasatch  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
in  1924-1927,  and  later  acted  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Scandinavian  organiza- 
tion in  Salt  Lake  City.  (See  History 
of  the  Scandinavian  Mission,  p.  467.) 

TOBIASON,  Theodore,  president  of 
the    Swedish    Mission    from    1913    to 


1916,  and  again  from  1919  to  1921, 
died  Dec.  17,  1929,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  617.) 


Swiss  Mission 


The  Swiss  Mission,  founded  in 
1850,  existed  as  a  distinct  mission 
(comprising  Switzerland)  until  1854, 
when  it  became  the  principal  part  of 
the  Swiss  and  Italian  Mission.  In 
1861  the  Swiss  Mission,  the  Italian 
Mission  and  the  German  Mission  were 
amalgamated  to  make  the  Swiss  and 
German  Mission.  Another  separation 
took  place  in  1898,  when  Switzerland 
again  became  a  distinct  mission,  and 
Germany  another,  and  thus  continued 
until  1904,  when  the  Swiss  Mission 
and  German  Mission  were  once  more 
amalgamated  and  were  continued  un- 
der the  title  of  the  Swiss  and  German 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


386 


Mission     (sometimes    written    Swiss- 
German  Mission). 

Presidents:  Thomas  B.  H.  Sten- 
house,  1850-1854;  Henry  E.  Bowman, 
1898-1900;  Lewis  S.  Cardon,  1900- 
1901;  David  L.  McDonald,  1901-1902; 
Levi  Edgar  Young,  1902-1904. 

BOWMAN,  Henry  Eyring,  presi- 
dent of  the  Swiss  Mission  from  1898 
to  1900,  was  born  Feb.  10,  1859,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Isaac  Bowman  and  Bertha  Eyring. 
He  was  baptized  when  he  was  ten 
years  old,  studied  under  Dr.  Karl  G. 
Maeser  at  the  Brigham  Young  Uni- 
versity in  Provo,  and  moved  to  St. 
George,  where  he  married  Mai-y  Gub- 
ler.  In  1897  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Germany  and  after  the  first 
year  was  called  to  preside  over  the 
Swiss  Mission.  After  his  return  to 
America  he  went  to  Mexico,  where 
he  lost  everything  in  a  revolution. 
He  later  moved  to  Kanab,  Utah,  and 
still  later  to  Logan,  where  he  labored 
in  the  Temple.  In  1897  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Switzerland.  Elder 
Bowman  died  May  30,  1933,  in  Provo, 
Utah. 

CARDON,  Lewis  S.,  president  of 
the  Swiss  Mission  from  1900  to  1901, 


died  Dec.  14,  1930. 
Vol.    1,   p.   420.) 


(See  Bio.  Ency., 


STENHOUSE,  Thomas  B.  H.,  pres- 
ident of  the  Swiss  Mission  from  1850 
to  1854,  was  born  Feb.  21,  1824,  in 
Daskieth,  Midlothian  Co.,  Scotland, 
the  son  of  George  and  Elizabeth  Sten- 
house.  He  was  baptized  July  14,  1845, 
at  the  age  of  17,  and  was  the  first 
missionary  to  preach  in  Hereford- 
shire and  the  city  of  Southampton, 
in  England.  He  accompanied  Lorenzo 
Snow  to  Italy  and  Switzerland,  where 
he,  assisted  by  his  wife,  established 
the  French  paper  "Le  Reflecteur,"  in 
defense  of  "Mormonism."  The  Swiss 
Mission  was  opened  in  December,  1850, 
with  Bro.  Stenhouse  as  president.  He 
assisted  John  Taylor  in  the  publica- 
tion of  "The  Mormon,"  in  New  York, 
and  came  to  Utah  in  September,  1859. 
He  wrote  frequently  for  the  "Deseret 
News,"  and  later  published  "The  Tele- 
graph." Elder  Stenhouse  died  in  San 
Francisco,  Calif.,  March  7,  1882,  and 
was  buried  at  Lone  Mountain. 

YOUNG,  Levi  Edgar,  president  of 
the  Swiss  Mission  from  1902  to  1904. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  798.) 


Vol.  IV,  No.  25 


June  19,  1936 


386 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


McDonald,  David  Lorenzo,  presi- 
dent of  the  Swiss  Mission  from  1901 
to  1902,  was  born  March  12,  1873,  at 
Heber  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Mc- 
Donald and  Mary  Lucinda  Cole.  He 
was  baptized  July  4,  1882,  by  his  fa- 
ther, ordained  a  Seventy  July  21, 
1899,  by  George  Teasdale,  who  also 
set  him  apart  on  that  date  as  a  mis- 
sionary to  Switzerland. 


Swiss  and  Italian  Mission 

Presidents:  (See  Swiss  and  German 
Mission).  Thomas  B.  H.  Stenhouse, 
January-October,  1854;  Daniel  Tyler, 
1854-1856;  John  L.  Smith,  1856-1857; 
Jabez  Woodard,   1857-1861. 


Swiss    and    German    Mission 

From  1850  to  1851,  and  from  1898 
to  1904  there  was  a  distinct  Swiss 
Mission.  From  1851  to  1857  the  Swiss 
Mission  constituted  the  principal  part 
of  the  Swiss  and  Italian  Mission.  From 
1857  to  1861  the  same  mission  was 
called  the  Swiss,  Italian  and  German 
Mission.  From  1867  to  1898  and  from 
1904  to  1930  it  was  called  the  Swiss 
and  German  Mission — sometimes  writ- 
ten Swiss-German  Mission.  (See  the 
Swiss  Mission  and  the  German  Mis- 
sion under  their  respective  titles.) 

Presidents:  Thomas  B.  H.  Sten- 
house, 1851-1854,  (See  Swiss  Mis- 
sion); Daniel  Tyler,  1854-1856;  John 
L.  Smith,  1856-1857;  Jabez  Woodard, 
1857-1861;  John  L.  Smith  (second 
term),  1861-1864;  Paul  A.  Schettler 
(pro  tem),  in  1864;  William  W.  Riter, 
in  1864;  William  Perry  Nebeker,  1865- 
1867;  Joseph  S.  Home,  1867-1868; 
Karl  G.  Maeser,  1868-1870;  Edward 
Schoenfeld,  1870-1872;  John  Huber, 
1872-1874;  John  U.  Stucki,  1874-1876; 
Joseph  S.  Home  (second  term),  1876- 
1877;  Henry  Flamm,  1877-1879;  Serge 


Louis  Ballif,  1879-1881;  John  Alder, 
1881-1882;  Peter  F.  Goss,  1882-1883; 
John  Q.  Cannon,  1883-1884;  Fred  W. 
Schoenfeld,  1884-1888;  John  U.  Stucki 
(second  term),  1888-1890;  Theodore 
Brandley,  1890-1891;  John  Jacob 
Scharrer,  1891-1894;  John  H.  Stoker, 
February- April,  1894;  George  C.  Nae- 
gle,  1894-1897;  Peter  Lautensock 
January-December,  1897,  (See  Swiss 
Mission  from  1898  to  1904);  Hugh  J. 
Cannon,  1904-1905;  Serge  Fred  Ballif, 
1905-1909;  Thomas  E.  McKay,  1909- 
1912;  Hyrum  W.  Valentine,  1912-1916; 
Angus  J.  Cannon,  1916-1920;  Serge 
Fred  Ballif  (second  term),  1920-1923; 
Fred  Tadje,  1923-1926;  Hugh  J.  Can- 
non (second  term),  1926-1928;  Fred 
Tadje    (second   term),   1928-1931. 

BALLIF,  Serge  F.,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1905 
to  1909,  and  from  1921  to  1923.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  306.) 

BALLIF,  Serge  L.,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1879 
to  1881.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  305.) 

BRANDLEY,  Theodore,  president  of 
the  Swiss  and  German  Mission  fx'om 


1890  to  1891,  was  a  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency  and  later  a  Patriarch 


il 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


387 


in  the  Taylor  Stake  of  Zion.  He  died 
May  6,  1928,  at  Stirling,  Alberta,  Can- 
ada.   (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  387.) 

CANNON,  Angus  Jenne,  president 
of  the  Swiss  and  German  Mission  from 
1916  to  1921,  was  born  Oct.  31,  1867, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
G«orge  Q.  Cannon  and  Sarah  Jane 
Jenne.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  in  Octo- 
ber, 1887,  by  Abraham  H.  Cannon  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in  1887- 
1890.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Aug.  18,  1901,  by  Reed 
Smoot  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
Parleys  Park  ward. 

CANNON,  John  Q.,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1883 
to  1884,  died  Jan.  14,  1931,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  243.) 

FLAMM,  Henry,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1877 
to  1879,  was  born  Nov.  28,  1837,  in 
Metzingen,  Wuitemberg,  Germany,  the 
son  of  John  Daniel  Flamm  and  Eliza- 
beth Barbara  Flamm.  He  emigrated 
to  America  in  1853,  was  baptized  Sept. 
17,  1861,  came  to  Utah  in  1862,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  2, 
1883.  After  acting  as  pi'esident  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1877 
to  1879,  he  was  called  to  settle  in  the 
Snake  River  Valley  in  Idaho.  He  died 
Aug.  19,  1913,  at  Rexburg,  Idaho. 

HUBER,  John,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1872 
to  1874,  was  born  Nov.  1,  1840,  in 
Dodtnacht,  Canton  Thurgau  (near  Con- 
stance), Switzerland,  the  son  of  John 
and  Elizabeth  Huber-Schonholger.  He 
was  baptized  May  4,  1860,  ordained 
an  Elder  Sept.  8,  1860,  by  Jabez  Wood- 
ard  and  labored  as  a  traveling  mission- 
ary in  Switzerland  and  South  Germany. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1863,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  10,  1867, 
and  being  called  on  a  mission,  he  left 


Salt  Lake  City,  for  Europe,  May  3, 
1871,  exactly  eight  years  from  the  time 
of  his  emigration  to  Utah. 

HORNE,  Joseph  S.,  president  of  the 
Swiss,  Italian  and  German  Mission  in 
1867,  and  president  of  the  Swiss  and 
German  Mission  from  1876  to  1877. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  206.) 


MAESER,  Karl  G.,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1868 
to  1870.   (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  707.) 

McKAY,  Thomas  E.,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1909 
to  1912.   (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  682.) 

NAEGLE,  George  C,  president  of 
the  Swiss  and  German  Mission  from 
1894  to  1897.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
pp.  562,  822.) 

NEBEKER,  William  Perry,  presi- 
dent of  the  Swiss,  Italian  and  German 
Mission  from  1865  to  1867,  died  Oct. 
16,  1910.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p. 
180.) 

RITER,  William  Wollerton,  president 
of  the  Swiss,  Italian  and  German  Mis- 
sion from  1864  to  1865,  was  born  Sept. 


388 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


4,  1838,  in  Chester  County,  Pennsyl- 
vania, the  son  of  Levi  E.  Riter  and 
Rebecca  Dilworth.  He  came  to  Utah 
in  the  fall  of  1847,  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission 
to  Germany  and  Switzerland  in  1863- 
1865,  being  president  the  last  year  of 
his  mission.  In  1865  he  accompanied 
Orson  Pratt  on  a  special  mission  to 
Austria;  he  was  then  appointed  to 
labor  in  Great  Britain  and  returned  to 
Utah  in  the  fall  of  1866.  In  March, 
1871,  he  married  Susan  Denton,  who 
after  bearing  him  three  children,  died 
in  1880.  Later  he  married  Priscilla 
Jennings,  with  whom  he  had  six  chil- 
dren. Elder  Riter  took  an  active  part 
in  the  building  of  the  Utah  Central 
Railroad  and  afterwards  in  the  roads 
leading  south  of  Salt  Lake  City.  He 
was  a  faithful  worker  in  the  Church, 
and  died  Jan.  17,  1922,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  (See  also  "Deseret  News"  of 
Jan.   17,  1922,  2nd  section,  p.  1.) 

SCHAERRER,  John  J.,  president  of 
the  Swiss  and  German  Mission  from 
1891  to  1894.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  514.) 

SCHOENFELD,  Edward,  president 
of  the  Swiss  and  German  Mission  from 
1870  to  1872,  was  born  March  8,  1832, 
in  Magdeburg,  near  Leipzig,  Saxony, 
Germany,  the  son  of  Wilhelm  Schoen- 
feld  and  Sophia  Krebs.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  the  river  Elbe  Oct.  14,  1855, 
by  Franklin  D.  Richards,  went  to  Eng- 
land in  1856,  labored  in  the  London 
Conference  for  one  year,  and  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1857.  From  February,  1870, 
to  July,  1872,  Elder  Schoenfeld  was 
president  of  the  Swiss  and  German 
Mission  and  editor  of  the  "Stern".  He 
died  Sept.  2,  1914,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
beloved  by  all  who  knew  him. 

SMITH,  John  Lyman,  president  of 
the  Swiss  and  Italian  Mission  from 
1856  to  1857,  was  born  Nov.  17,  1828, 
at  Pottsdam,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  New 


York,  the  son  of  John  Smith  and  Clar- 
issa Lyman.  He  was  baptized  in  1836 
by  John  Smith;  suffered  persecutions 
with  the  Saints  in  Nauvoo,  and  other 
places,  came  to  the  "Valley"  in  1847; 
filled  two  missions  to  Europe,  took  part 
in  the  Indian  wars  in  Utah,  and  died 
Feb.  24,  1898,  in  St.  George,  Utah. 

STUCKI,  John  U.,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1874 
to  1876  and  from  1888  to  1890.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  29.) 

TADJE,  Frederick,  piesident  of  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission  from  1923 
to    1925,    president    of    the    German- 


Austrian  Mission  from  1925  to  1926, 
and  president  of  the  Swiss  and  German 
Mission  from  1928  to  1931,  was  born 
Sept.  5,  1886,  in  Barsinghausen,  Prov- 
ince Hanover,  Germany,  the  son  of 
Philip  Tadje  and  Lina  Westphal.  He 
was  eight  years  old  when  his  father 
joined  the  Church  in  Germany.  About 
April  28,  1903,  in  company  \vith  other 
members  of  a  small  branch,  he  emi- 
grated to  the  United  States,  arriving 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


389 


in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  May  14,  1903. 
At  that  time  he  was  16  years  old;  his 
parents  and  the  rest  of  the  family  did 
not  emigrate  until  a  year  later.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Netherlands  in 
1906-1909,  after  being  ordained  an 
Elder  in  1906  by  Everett  Peck.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  12, 1923, 
by  Charles  W.  Penrose,  and  with  his 
family  was  called  to  take  charge  of 
the  Swiss  and  German  Mission.  He 
acted  as  president  of  that  mission  from 
1923  to  1926.  From  1927  to  1928  he 
presided  over  the  Latter-day  Saint 
German  organization  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  after  being  at  home  15 
months,  he  was  called  again  to  preside 
over  the  Swiss  and  German  Mission; 
acted  in  that  capacity  until  Oct.  24, 
1931.  Pres.  Tadje  has  always  taken  a 
very  prominent  part  in  the  Church, 
and  is  at  present  (1936)  auditor  in  the 
mission  department  at  the  Presiding 
Bishop's   Office. 

TYLER,  Daniel,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  Italian  Mission  from  1854 
to  1856,  was  born  Nov.  23,  1816,  in 
Semproneous,  Cayuga  Co.,  New  York, 
the  son  of  Andrew  Tyler  and  Elizabeth 
Comins.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  16, 
1833,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  24, 
1844,  and  sent  on  a  mission;  oidained 
a  Patriarch  Dec.  10,  1873,  by  George 
A.  Smith  in  Beaver,  Utah.  Daniel 
Tyler  was  a  member  of  the  famous 
Mormon  Battalion.  He  died  Nov.  7, 
1906,  in  Beaver,  Utah. 

VALENTINE,  Hyrum  W.,  president 
of  the  Swiss  and  German  Mission  from 
1912  to  1916.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  731.) 

WOODARD,  Jabez,  president  of  the 
Swiss  and  Italian  Mission  from  1857 
to  1861,  and  president  of  the  Swiss, 
Italian  and  German  Mission  in  1861, 
died  March  2,  1870,  at  Milton,  Utah. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  571.) 


Tahitian  Mission 

(See   Society   Islands   Mission) 


Tongan  Mission 

Presidents:  Brigham  Smoot,  1891- 
1892;  Olonzo  D.  Merrill,  1892-1895; 
Alfred  M.  Durham,  1895-1897;  Willard 
L.  Smith,  1917-1920;  Mark  V.  Coombs, 
1920-1927;  Jay  A.  Cahoon,  1927-1929; 
Newel  J.  Cutler,  1929-1933. 

CAHOON,  Jay  Alder,  president  of 
the  Tongan  Mission  from  1927  to  1929, 
was  born  May  18,  1905,  in  Leavitt,  Al- 
berta, Canada,  a  son  of  Geo.  Edward 
Cahoon  and  Annie  Louise  Alder.  He 
was  baptized  June  16,  1913,  set  apart 
Jan.  13,  1925,  for  a  mission  to  Tonga, 
and  was  set  apart  as  president  of  that 
Mission  Oct.  21,  1928. 

COOMBS,  Mark  Vernon,  president  of 
the  Tongan  Mission  from  1920  to  1927, 
was  born  Feb.  5,  1891,  in  Nephi,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Mark  Anthony  Coombs  and 
Henrietta  McCune.  He  was  baptized 
Feb.  4,  1899,  filled  a  mission  to  Samoa 
in  1911 +  ,  and  was  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Tongan  Mission  July  13, 
1920.     He  returned  in  1927. 

CUTLER,  Newel  J.,  president  of  the 
Tongan  Mission  from  1929  to  1933, 
was  born  Jan.  12,  1893,  in  Glenwood, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jonathan  C. 
Cutler  and  Rebecca  Nelsen.  He  was 
baptized  May  19,  1901,  filled  a  mission 
to  Tonga  in  1913-1916,  and  was  set 
apart  for  another  mission  to  Tonga 
Aug.  16,  1929,  to  act  as  president. 

DURHAM,  Alfred  M.,  president  of 
the  Tongan  Mission  from  1895  to  1896, 
was  born  Sept.  23,  1873,  in  Parowan 
Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  Durham  and 
Caroline  Mortensen.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  23,  1880,  set  apart  Feb.  27,  1893, 
for  a  mission  to  Tonga,  and  returned 
home  in  1896, 


390 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


MERRILL,  Olonzo  D.,  president  of 
the  Tongan  Mission  from  1892  to  1895, 
was  born  Dec.  13,  1867,  in  Richmond, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Marriner  W.  Merrill  and 
Cyrene  Stanley.  He  was  baptized 
when  nine  years  old,  set  apart  April 
13,  1892,  for  a  mission  to  Tonga,  and 
presided  over  the  Mission  from  Oct.  24, 
1892  to  July  22,  1895. 

SMITH,  Willard  Lisbon,  president  of 
the  Tongan  Mission  from  1917  to  1920, 
was  born  Sept.  2,  1891,  in  Farmington, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Willard  Gilbert  Smith 
and  Mariah  Lamb.  He  was  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  Samoa  Jan.  13,  1915, 
and  from  Samoa  he  was  sent  to  pre- 
side over  the  Tongan  Mission  in  1917; 
he  was  released  April  9,  1920. 

SMOOT,  Brigham,  president  of  the 
Tongan  Mission  from  1891  to  1892,  was 
born  June  15,  1869,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Abraham  O.  Smoot 
and  Annie  K.  Morrison.  He  was  bap- 
tized Jan.  17,  1877,  was  set  apart  for 
a  mission  to  Samoa  May  27,  1889,  and 
after  laboring  two  years  and  one 
month  he  left  July  12,  1891,  to  open 
up  the  work  in  the  Tongan  Islands. 
He  acted  as  president  of  the  Tongan 
Mission  from  July  14,  1891,  to  Oct. 
24,  1892,  and  returned  to  Salt  Lake 
City  Dec.  19,  1892.  Elder  Olonzo  D. 
Merrill  succeeded  Elder  Smoot  as  pres- 
ident of  the  Tongan  Mission. 


Turkish  Mission 

Presidents:  Jacob  Spori,  1885-1887; 
Ferdinand  F.  Hintze,  1887-1889;  Fred- 
erick Stauffer,  1889-1891;  Joseph  F. 
Schoenfeld,  1891-1892;  Don  C.  W.  Mus- 
ser,  1892-1894;  Edward  W.  Robinson. 
1894-1895;  Armanag  S.  Hagopian, 
1895-1897;  Philip  S.  Maycock,  1897- 
1899;  Ferdinand  F.  Hintze  (second 
term),  1899-1900;  Albert  Herman, 
1900-1904;  J.  Wilford  Booth,  1904- 
1909;    local    Elders    in    charge,    1909- 


1921;  J.  Wilford  Booth  (second  term), 
1921-1924. 

Note:  In  1924  the  name  of  the 
Turkish  Mission  was  changed  to  that 
of  the  Armenian   Mission. 

HERMAN,  Albert,  president  of  the 
Turkish  Mission  from  1900  to  1904, 
was  born  Oct.  27,  1861,  near  Tilsit, 
East  Prussia,  Germany,  a  son  of 
George  D.  Herman  and  Maria  Petereit. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  11,  1885,  set 
apart  March  27,  1900,  for  a  mission  to 
Turkey,  and  was  appointed  president 
Oct.  9,  1900. 


HINTZE,  Ferdinand  F.,  president  of 
the  Turkish  Mission  from  1887  to  1889 
and  from  1899  to  1900,  was  born  May 


13,  1854,  at  Roskilde,  Denmark,  a  son 
of  Anders  Hintze  and  Karen  Sophie 
Nikolaisen.  He  was  baptized  May  13, 
1862,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1864,  and 
filled  missions  to  the  Northwestern 
States  in  1877-1878  and  1879-1880.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1885- 
1887,  and  one  to  Turkey  in  1897-1900. 
On  the  latter  mission  he  published 
29,000  tracts  in  the  Turkish  and  Ar- 
menian languages.     In   1906  he  pub- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


391 


lished  the  Book  of  Mormon  in  Turkish. 
Elder  Hintze  died  March  9,  1928. 

MAYCOCK,  Philip  Starkey,  presi- 
dent of  the  Turkish  Mission  from  1897 
to  1899,  was  born  May  23,  1872,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas 
Maycock  and  Louisa  Starkey.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  attend- 
ed the  Latter-day  Saints  College, 
taught  school  four  yeai's,  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  July  15,  1896,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant,  and  filled  a  mission  to  Germany 
in  1896-1897.  He  died  March  21,  1907, 
in  Salt  Lake  City. 

MUSSER,  Don  C.  W.,  president  of 
the  Turkish  Mission  from  1892  to  1894, 
was  born  Aug.  28,  1869,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  A.  Milton  Musser 
and  Mary  White.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  set  apart  April 
10,  1891,  to  fill  a  mission  to  Switzerland 
and  Germany,  and  on  Feb,  29,  1892, 
he  was  released  from  that  mission  and 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Turkish 
Mission. 

ROBINSON,  Edward  W.,  president 
of  the  Turkish  Mission  from  1894  to 
1895,  was  born  July  10, 1866,  in  Ameri- 
can Fork,  Utah,  a  son  of  Edward 
Robinson  and  Sarah  Harrington.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old,  set 
apart  June  19,  1893,  to  labor  in  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission,  and  in 
February  of  the  following  year  he  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Turkish 
Mission. 

SCHOENFELD,  Joseph  F.,  president 
of  the  Turkish  Mission  from  1891  to 
1892,  was  born  July  22,  1864,  on  the 
Plains  in  the  State  of  Nebraska,  a  son 
of  Frederick  William  Schoenfeld  and 
Henrietta  Lehmann.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  13,  1872,  set  apart  Aug  28,  1891, 
for  a  mission  to  Turkey,  and  at  the 
close  of  1891  he  presided  over  the 
Turkish  Mission. 


SPORI,  Jacob,  president  of  the  Turk- 
ish Mission  from  1885  to  1887,  was 
born  March  26, 1847,  in  Oberwyl,  Switz- 
erland, a  son  of  Jacob  Spori  and  Susan 
Katherine  Boehlen.  He  was  baptized 
May  28,  1877,  ordained  an  Elder  Dec. 
31, 1878,  labored  as  a  missionary  in  his 
native  land  during  the  winter  and 
spring  of  1879,  and  came  to  Utah  in 
July  of  that  year.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  Switzerland  and  Palestine  in  1884- 
1887.  Elder  Spori  presided  over  the 
mission  at  the  close  of  1885,  and  left 
Constantinople  March  23,  1887,  for 
America. 

STAUFFER,  Frederick,  president  of 
the  Turkish  Mission  from  1889  to  1891, 
was  born  Oct.  24,  1866,  in  Willard, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Stauffer  and 
Elizabeth  Mussler,  He  was  baptized 
when  about  nine  years  old,  set  apart 
April  20,  1889,  for  a  mission  to  Turkey, 
and  returned  Dec.  23,  1891. 


Western  States  Mission 

Presidents:  Joseph  A.  McRae,  1907- 
1908;  John  L.  Herrick,  1908-1919;  John 
M.  Knight,  1919-1928;  Elias  S.  Wood- 
ruff, 1928-1933. 

HERRICK,  John  L.,  president  of 
the  Western  States  Mission  from  1908 
to  1919.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  145.) 

KNIGHT,  John  M.,  president  of  the 
Western  States  Mission  from  1919  to 
1928.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  778.) 

McRAE,  Joseph  S.,  president  of  the 
Western  States  Mission  from  1907  to 
1908.  (See  Colorado  Mission,  page 
325.) 

WOODRUFF,  Elias  S.,  president  of 
the  Western  States  Mission  from  1928 
to  1933.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  367.) 


— •loc^SVoi" 


392 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


STAKE   AND    WARD    OFFICERS 
Arranged    Alphabetically    by    Stakes 


Alberta  Stake 

AINSCOUGH,      William      Thomas, 

presiding  Elder  from  1906  to  1913  and 
Bishop  from  1915  to  1919  of  the  Wool- 
ford  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada, 
was  born  July  10, 1854,  in  Cottonwood, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Ainscough  and  Mary  Clark.  He 
was  baptized  in  July,  1866,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Henry  L.  Hinman  May 
13,  1906  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
8,  1915,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

BENNETT,  John  Harvey,  Bishop  of 
the  Kimball  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1924  to  1927,  was  born 
July  4,  1870,  at  New  Harmony,  Kane 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  George  Bennett 
and  Nancy  Melvina  Taylor.  He  was 
baptized  June  27,  1880,  by  William 
Blood,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
April  30, 1924,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

BURT,  Charles  Willden,  Bishop  of 
the  Cardston  1st  Ward,  Alberta,  Can- 
ada, from  1914  to  1918,  was  born 
Jan.  18,  1877,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  the 
son  of  William  Burt  and  Louisa  Will- 
den. He  was  baptized  when  9  years 
old,  ordained  an  Elder  May  3,  1903,  by 
Wm.  H.  Steed,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1907-1909,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Heber  J.  Grant  May  19, 
1918. 

CAHOON,  George  Edward,  Bishop 
of  Leavitt,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada, 
from  1921  to  1930,  was  born  Feb.  23, 
1877,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the  son  of  James 
Cordon  Gaboon  and  Ellen  Spencer  Wil- 
son. He  was  baptized  May  7,  1885, 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  20,  1906,  by 
Wm.  H.  Steed,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  in  1907-1909,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  20,  1921,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

DUCE,  George  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Beazer  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada, 
from  1916  to  1919,  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Thomas  Duce  Jan.  9,  1916. 


DUCE,  Thomas,  first  counselor  in 
the  Alberta  Stake  presidency,  Canada, 
from  1899  to  1902  and  from  1903  to 
1925,  was  born  May  26,  1846,  in  Derby, 
Derbyshire,  England,  the  son  of  Henry 
Duce  and  Esther  Higginson.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  28,  1860,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1862;  was  ordained  an 
Elder  when  17  years  old,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1879-1881, 
and  took  a  most  prominent  part  in  the 
founding  of  Latter-day  Saint  colonies 
in   Canada. 

DUCE,  Thomas  Wallace,  Bishop  of 
the  Cardston  2nd  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1914  to  1925,  was  born 
Dec.  4,  1871,  at  Hyde  Park,  Cache 
County,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Duce 
and  Mary  Ann  Hymas.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  4,  1879,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  9,  1895,  by  John  W.  Tay- 
lor and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  8, 
1914,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

DUNN,  John  Madden,  Bishop  of 
Kimball  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada, 
from  1898  to  1903,  was  born  March  3, 
1864,  in  Willard,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  Dunn  and  Mary  Jane 
Madden.  He  was  baptized  March  28, 
1874,  moved  to  Canada  in  1893,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  1,  1900,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He 
died  in  November,  1919,  in  Lethbridge, 
Canada. 

FRODSHAM,  James  R.,  Bishop  of 
the  Kimball  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1927  to  1928,  was  born 
Dec.  23,  1883,  the  son  of  James  Frod- 
sham  and  Alta  Rudd.  He  was  baptized 
in  1891  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  7,  1927,  by  David  0. 
McKay. 

GREGSON,  Thomas  S.,  Bishop  of  the 
Kimball  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada, 
from  1909  to  1913,  was  born  July  29, 
1870,  in  Haslingden,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land,  the   son   of   John   Gregson   and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


393 


Rosannah  Sinnett.  He  was  baptized 

Dec,   6,    1883,    and  ordained    a   High 

Priest   and   Bishop  Dec.    4,   1909,   by 
Henry  L.  Hinman. 

HAMMER,  Josiah  Austin,  Bishop  of 
the  Cai-dston  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1895  to  1908,  was  born 
Oct.  9,  1855,  at  Uintah,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Josiah  Hammer  and 
EHzabeth  Osborn.  He  was  baptized 
Feb.  21,  1864,  and  located  in  Cardston, 
Canada,  in  1887,  where  he  died  May 
19,   1922. 

HARKER,  Heber  Lawrence,  Bishop 
of  the  Hill  Spring  Ward,  Alberta 
Stake,  Canada,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Jan.  1,  1880,  at  Vernon, 
Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Heber  Wil- 
lard  Harker  and  Margaret  A.  Terry. 
He  was  baptized  when  8  years  old, 
moved  in  1905  to  Cardston,  where  he 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Wm.  E. 
Yancey,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1909-1911;  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Edward  J.  Wood  June 
25,  1916,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
25,  1929,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

HARRIS,  Leo  Lott,  Bishop  of  Wool- 
ford  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada, 
from  1913  to  1915,  was  born  April  9, 
1886,  in  Payson,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Dennison  Emer  Harris  and  Eunice 
Stewart.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1908-1910. 

JACOBS,     Zebulon     William,     2nd 

counselor  in  the  Alberta  Stake  presi- 
dency, Canada,  from  1928  to  1930  and 
first  counselor  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  28,  1877,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Henry  Chariton  Jacobs  and 
Susan  Stringham.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old;  moved  to 
Canada  in  1899,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Patriarch  Henry  L. 
Hinman  Nov.  22,  1908. 

JENSEN,  Anders  (Andrew)  Chris- 
tian, Bishop  of  the  Aetna  Ward,  Alber- 
ta Stake,  Canada,  from  1920  to  1930  + , 
was    born    Oct.    4,    1868,    in    Aasted, 


Hjorring  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Hans  Christian  Jensen  and  Caroline  M. 
Andreasen.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  25, 
1882,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1886,  and 
later  settled  in  Canada.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  in  1902  by  Edw. 
J.  Wood  and  a  Bishop  May  2,  1920,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

JOHANSEN,  John  Albert,  Bishop 
of  the  Woolford  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1924  to  1928,  was  born 
May  13,  1877,  in  Mt.  Pleasant,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Peter  Johansen  and  Anna 
Christine  Christensen.  He  was  baptized 
May  13,  1885;  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Anthon  H.  Lund  June  7,  1899,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1899- 
1901;  moved  to  Canada  in  1904;  set- 
tled in  Woolford  in  1906,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  May  18,  1913,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
13,  1924,  by  Stephen  L  Richards. 

LEAVITT,  Edward  Jenkins,  Bishop 
of  the  Glenwood  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1911  to  1926,  was  born 
Sept.  25,  1875,  in  Wellsville,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  R.  Leav- 
itt  and  Ann  Eliza  Jenkins.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  Jan.  4,  1897,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young,  filled  a  mission  to  Manitoba, 
Canada,  in  1897-1899,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Nov.  26,  1911,  by  Geo. 
P.  Richards. 

LEAVITT,  Frank,  Bishop  of  Leavitt 
Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada,  from 
1896  to  1908,  was  born  April  6,  1870, 
in  Wellsville,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Thomas  R.  Leavitt  and  Ann  Eliza 
Jenkins.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  John  A.  Woolf  Nov.  25,  1896;  lo- 
cated in  Glenwood  Ward  in  1921. 

LOW,  Thomas  Scott  Budge,  Bishop 
of  the  Kimball  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1918  to  1923,  was  born 
Jan.  26,  1871,  in  Providence,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  Walker 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Low  and  Helen  Budge.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  May,  1879,  and  located  in 
Kimball  Ward  in  1902;  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 

LOWRY,  Marcellus  Anderson,  Bish- 
op of  Taylorville  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1917  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  7,  1877,  in  Fanshaw,  Hanover 
Co.,  Virginia,  the  son  of  Benjamin 
Franklin  Lowry  and  Victoria  Eddie- 
ton.  He  was  baptized  in  1891,  moved 
to  Canada  in  1899,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Geoi'ge  Teasdale,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  George  Albert 
Smith  in  1917. 

NELSON,  Robert  A.,  Bishop  of  Tay- 
lor Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada,  from 
1908  to  1917,  was  born  Jan.  22,  1871, 
in  Smithfield,  Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel 
Nelson  and  Ann  Janett  McBride.  He 
was  baptized  by  Robert  Meikle,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest,  May  31,  1900, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  May  23,  1908. 

NIELSON,  Gustave  (Gustaf),  Bish- 
op of  the  Cardston  1st  Ward,  Alberta 
Stake,  Canada,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  4,  1870,  in  Gardstanga, 
Malmohus  Ian,  Sweden,  the  son  of 
Niels  Nielson  and  Sidsa  Peterson.  He 
emigrated  with  his  parents  to  Utah  in 
1873;  was  baptized  May  2,  1878;  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  19,  1918, 
by  Henry  L.  Hinman,  and  sustained 
as  Bishop  of  the  Cardston  1st  Ward 
Aug.  22,  1928. 

NIELSEN,  James  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Kimball  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada, 
from  1913  to  1918,  was  born  Feb.  22, 
1880,  in  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Mads  Nielsen  and  Mette  Max*ie 
Christensen.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  27,  1913,  by  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith.  He  died  in  Cardston  about 
1926. 

PARRISH,  Ernest,  Bishop  of  Moun- 
tain View  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Can- 


ada, from  1918  to  1930,  was  born  Aug. 
13,  1877,  in  Centerville,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joel  Parrish  and 
Emma  Ford.  He  was  baptized  in  1887; 
moved  to  Canada  in  1900;  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  by  Thomas  Duce 
about  1907,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
George  Albert  Smith. 

PETERSON,  George  Enoch,  Bishop 
of  the  Beazer  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
May  5,  1873,  in  Mt.  Pleasant,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Anders  (Andrew)  Peterson  and 
Fannie  McLean.  He  was  baptized  May 
29,  1881;  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
9,  1916,  by  Sterling  Williams,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  3,  1919,  by  Or- 
son F.  Whitney. 

PITCHER,  Arthur  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Woolford  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1918  to  1923,  was  born 
Nov.  15,  1874,  in  Smithfield,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Edward  Pitcher  and 
Susan  Everett.  He  was  baptized  July 
10,  1883,  and  settled  in  Canada  in 
1900.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  28,  1917,  by  Edward  J.  Wood,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  19,  1918,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

PITCHER,  Walter  Edward,  Bishop 
of  Cardston  2nd  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1925  to  1930-f ,  was  born 
July  13,  1871,  in  Farmington,  Davis 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Edward  Pitcher 
and  Susan  Everett.  He  was  baptized 
May  5,  1881,  moved  to  Canada  in  1893, 
and  located  at  Cardston.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  by  Patriarch  Hyrum 
G.  Smith  July  31,  1925. 

SLOAN,  William  R.,  Bishop  of  the 
Kimball  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Can- 
ada, from  1903  to  1908,  was  born 
March  30,  1881,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Hugh  R.  Sloan  and  Margaret 
Reid.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1889, 
by  Hans  Dennison,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug.  23,  1903,  by  Heber 
S.  Allen. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


395 


SMITH,  Willard  Gilbert,  Bishop  of 
Leavitt  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Canada, 
from  1908  to  1921,  was  born  Sept.  8, 
1870,  in  Littleton,  Morgan  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Willard  G.  Smith  and  Cor- 
delia Thui'ston.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
8,  1878,  by  Lyman  Mecham,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Willard  G. 
Smith,  sen. 

STEED,  Joseph  Evan,  Bishop  of  the 
Woolford  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Can- 
ada, from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  12,  1872,  in  Farmington,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  Wilford  Steed  and  Ann 
Jenkins.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Sey- 
mour B.  Young  Feb.  17,  1897,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1897-1899.  In  1900  he  located  at 
Cardston,  Canada;  was  oi'dained  a 
High  Priest  Oct.  28,  1917,  by  Thomas 
Duce,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
22,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

TANNER,  James  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Aetna  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Can- 
ada, from  1918  to  1920,  was  born  Dec. 
3,  1877,  in  Cokeville,  Uinta  Co.,  Wyo- 
ming, the  son  of  John  William  Tan- 
ner and  Lucy  R.  Snyder.  He  was 
baptized  July  3,  1898;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  15,  1899,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Aug.  7,  1918. 

TANNER,  Nathan  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Aetna  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1903  to  1918,  was  born 
Oct.  19,  1870,  in  Wanship,  Summit  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  William  Tan- 
ner and  Lucy  R.  Snyder.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  6,  1896,  by  Wm.  H.  Branch, 
and  oi-dained  a  Bishop  Dec.  23,  1902, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith. 

THOMSON,  Daniel  Andrew,  Bishop 
of  the  Kimball  Ward,  Alberta  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1908  to  1909,  was  born 
Oct.  9,  1866,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Waldemar  Thomson  and  Caro- 
line Jensen. 

WOOD,  Edward  Glen,  Bishop  of  the 
Glenwood  Ward,  Alberta  Stake,  Can- 


ada, from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  8,  1893,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Edward  James  Wood  and 
Mary  Ann  Solomon.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  8,  1901,  moved  to  Canada  the 
same  year,  filled  a  mission  to  Samoa 
in  1914-1917,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op April  24,  1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 


Alpine  Stake 


ABEL,  George  Edward,  jun..  Bishop 
of  the  American  Fork  3rd  Ward,  Al 
pine  Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  15,  1886,  in  American  Fork,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Geo.  Edward  Abel  and  Mary 
Ellon  Shelley.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
6, 1894,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  24,  1928,  by  Clifford  E.  Young. 
Elder  Abel  filled  a  mission  to  Holland 
in  1906-1909. 

BOOTH,    Wayne   Chipman,    Bishop 

of  the  Highland  Ward,  Alpine  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1922,  was  born 
April  16,  1892,  in  Alpine,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Robert  Ebenezer 
Booth  and  Lovenia  Jane  Chipman.  He 
was  baptized  April  15,  1900,  by  his 
father,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  July  4,  1920,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son.  He  died  April  27,  1927,  at  Ameri- 
can  Fork. 

GREENWOOD,      Thomas      Abram, 

Bishop  of  the  American  Fork  1st  Ward, 
Alpine  Stake,  Utah,  since  1928,  was 
born  June  17,  1881,  in  American  Fork, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Wm.  H.  Greenwood 
and  Charlotte  Wood.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1906- 
1908,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
26,  1910,  by  Abel  Evans,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  July  22,  1928,  by  Pres.  Heber 
J.  Grant. 

GREENWOOD,  William  Snow,  Bish- 
op of  the  Highland  Ward,  Alpine 
Stake,  Utah,  since  1922,  was  born  July 


396 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


23,  1874,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Jacob  Greenwood  and  Melissa  Snow. 
He  was  baptized  June  24, 1884,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  29,  1923,  by 
Rudger  Clawson.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1895-1898. 

HOUSTON,  Isaac,  Bishop  of  the 
Alpine  Ward,  Alpine  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1852  to  1856,  was  born  Oct.  5, 
1799,  in  New  Hampshire.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  28,  1840,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  and 
migrated  to  Utah  in  1851.  He  died 
Aug.  23,   1856,  in   Alpine. 

HUNTER,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
American  Fork  3rd  Ward,  Alpine 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930,  was 
born  Oct.  22,  1866,  in  American  Fork, 
the  son  of  Ebenezer  Hunter  and  Agnes 
Martin.  He  was  baptized  in  1875,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1897-1899. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  July  22, 
1928,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

JERLING  (JORLING),  Carl  Emil 
Harry,  Bishop  of  the  Highland  Ward, 
Alpine  Stake,  Utah,  since  1930,  was 
born  Oct.  9,  1899,  in  Vingaker,  Soder- 
manland,  Sweden,  the  son  of  Emil  A. 
Jorling  and  Emma  Maria  Person.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  parents  in 
1907,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  1,  1928,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

McCULLOUGH,  Thomas  Jefferson, 

Bishop  of  the  Alpine  Ward,  Alpine 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1856  to  1893,  was 
born  Aug.  18,  1826,  in  White  County, 
Tenn.,  the  son  of  Thomas  McCullough 
and  Mary  Hefner.  He  was  baptized 
April  9,  1842,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1852,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
18,  1856,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov. 
15,  1856,  by  Edward  Hunter.  He  died 
April  10,  1893. 

PATTERSON,  Charles  Gold,  Bishop 
of  the  American  Fork  1st  Ward,  Alpine 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1901  to  1903,  was 
born  May  14,  1871,  at  Shelby,  North 
Carolina,  a  son  of  John  H.  Patterson 
and  Marguerite  M.  Gold.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
Geo.  Teasdale  July  14,  1901. 

PETERSON,  Charles  Shreeve,  Pre- 
siding Elder  at  Alpine,  Alpine  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1852,  was  born  July  28,  1818, 
at  Mount  Holly,  Burlington  Co.,  New 
Jersey,  the  son  of  Andrew  Peterson 
and  Martha  Murdock.  He  was  an  early 
settler  in  Weber  Valley,  Utah,  where 
he  acted  as  Bishop.  Later,  he  figured 
prominently  in  Arizona.  He  died  Sept. 
26,  1889,  in  Mesa,  Arizona. 

ROBINSON,  Lot,  Bishop  of  the 
American  Fork  4th  Ward,  Alpine 
Stake,  Utah,  since  1928,  was  born  Jan. 
19,  1880,  in  American  Fork,  the  son  of 
Wm.  Walker  Robinson  and  Sai-ah  Eck- 
ersley.  He  was  baptized  July  5,  1888, 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  July  18,  1900, 
by  Mathias  Cowley,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1900-1902,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  April  27,  1924, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  5, 
1928,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

WALKER,  Jesse  M.,  2nd  counselor 
in  the  stake  presidency  of  the  Alpine 
Stake,  Utah,  since  1928,  was  bom  Dec. 
15,  1885,  in'Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Apollus  Benjamin  Walker  and 
Jane  Holman.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
5,  1885,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  8, 1918,  by  James  E.  Talmage,  and 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  American  Fork 
3rd  Ward  from  1924  to  1928. 

YOUNG,  Clifford  Earle,  president  of 
the  Alpine  Stake,  Utah,  since  1928,  was 
born  Dec.  7,  1883,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Seymour  B.  Young 
and  Ann  Elizabeth  Riter.  He  was 
baptized  May  3,  1892,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1905-1908.  He 
was  chosen  pi-esident  of  the  Alpine 
Stake  July  1,  1928,  and  set  apart  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


397 


ZABRISKIE,  George  Albert,  Bishop 
of  the  Highland  Ward,  Alpine  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1915  to  1920,  was  born  Nov. 
15,  1856,  in  Provo,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Alva  Zabriskie  and  Susan  Roberts.  He 
was  baptized  in  1868  by  Wm.  J.  Rob- 
erts, was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
3,  1908,  by  Jos.  B.  Keeler,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  July  25,  1915,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.  He  died  November  9,  1930,  in 
American  Fork. 


Bannock  Stake 

ANDERSEN,      Frederick      Homer, 

Bishop  of  the  Cleveland  Ward,  Ban- 
nock Stake,  Idaho,  from  1927  to 
1930  + ,  was  born  Jan.  27, 1893,  in  Bear 
River  City,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Andrew  Andersen  and  Sophia 
Johnson.  He  was  baptized  April  1, 
1901,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  5,  1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

ANDERSON,  Gustaf  Erik,  Bishop 
of  the  Central  Ward,  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1917  to  1924,  was  born 
Sept.  6,  1873,  in  Dalarne,  Sweden,  the 
son  of  Anders  Gustaf  Anderson  and 
Hadda  Romlin.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1891,  was  baptized  at  Kanesville, 
near  Ogden,  Utah,  the  same  year,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  14, 
1915,  and  a  Bishop  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage  Aug.  19,  1917. 

CHRISTENSEN,    Christian    Miller, 

Bishop  of  the  Central  Ward,  Bannock 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930,  was 
born  Feb.  3,  1889,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Ferdinand  C.  Christensen  and 
Elsie  Mary  Miller.  He  was  baptized 
June  5,  1897,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  28,  1928,  and  set  apart  as  Bishop 
by  Geo^  F.  Richards. 

CLEGG,  Robert  Williams,  Bishop  of 
the  Bench  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Idaho, 
since  1922,  was  born  June  28,  1892,  at 
Perry,  Oneida  (now  Bannock)  County, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  Benjamin  Clegg  and 


Anna  J.  Williams.  He  was  baptized 
in  1900,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
18,  1918,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  17,  1922,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

CORBETT,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Turner  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1913  to  1917,  was  born  Oct.  24, 
1873,  at  Smithfield,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Corbett  and  Emily  Woodward. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  6,  1883,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  May  12,  1907,  by  John 
Henry  Smith,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States  in  1911-1912. 

GREENE,  Joseph  P.,  Bishop  of  the 
Turner  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1906  to  1910,  was  born  Jan.  15, 
1872,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Evan  Moulbourne  Greene,  and  Susie 
Piatt.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  2,  1880, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  24,  1906, 
by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Turner  Ward  June  24,  1906. 

HALE,  Ernest  F.,  Bishop  of  the 
Cleveland  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1893  to  1905,  was  born  Sept. 
4,  1863,  in  Grantsville,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Alma  H.  Hale  and  Sarah  Ann 
Clark.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1871, 
located  in  the  Mormon  Ward,  Gentile 
Valley,  in  1887,  and  was  appointed 
Bishop  in  1893.  He  died  Sept.  29,  1922. 

HANSEN,  Carl  Oscar,  Bishop  of 
the  Turner  Ward,  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho,  in  1926,  was  barn  Nov.  15, 
1883,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Niels  Hansen  and  Emma  Olson. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  1,  1892,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  15, 
1915,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

HARRIS,  Guy,  Bishop  of  the  Lago 
(Trout  Creek)  Ward,  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1921  to  1926,  was  born 
April  28,  1896,  in  Lago,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  William  McGee  Harris  and  Har- 
riet   A.    Carson.     He    was    baptized 


398 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


April  28,  1904,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  19,  1921, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HARRIS,  William  McGee,  Bishop 
of  the  Trout  Creek  Ward,  Bannock 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1891  to  1915,  was 
born  May  23,  1862,  at  Richmond, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
Harris  and  Emeline  Whittle.  He  was 
baptized  in  May,  1874,  located  in  Gen- 
tile Valley  in  1884,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  5,  1891, 
by  Marriner   W.   Merrill, 

HEGSTROM,  William  C,  Bishop  of 
the  Central  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1924  to  1926,  was  born  Nov. 
15,  1877,  in  Sweden,  the  son  of  Claus 
F.  Hegstrom  and  Lovina  Olson.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  11,  1890,  emigrated 
to  America,  and  was  oi'dained  a  Sev- 
enty. He  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
May  25,  1924,  and  died  May  21,  1926. 

HOGAN,  Ira,  Bishop  of  the  Thatcher 
Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1898  to  1905,  was  born  Nov.  24,  1854, 
in  West  Bountiful,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Goudy  Hogan  and  Bergitta 
Nilson.  He  was  baptized  by  John 
Allsop,  located  in  Gentile  Valley  in 
1881,  and  was  called  to  act  as  Bishop 
of  the  Thatcher  Ward  when  the  Ban- 
nock Stake  was  organized,  July  24, 
1898,  He  died  at  Soda  Springs,  Idaho, 
April  16,  1905. 

HUBBARD,  Alma  Edward,  Bishop 
of  the  Bench  Ward,  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1907  to  1915,  was  born 
April  13,  1874,  in  Willard,  Box  Elder 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Charles  W.  Hub- 
bard and  Mary  Edwards.  He  was  or- 
dained   a    High   Priest    May    1,    1894. 

HUBBARD,  James  Willard,  Bishop 
of  the  Bench  Ward,  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1904  to  1907,  was  born 
Feb.  12,  1861,  in  Willard,  Box  Elder 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Charles  W.  Hub- 


bard   and    Sophia    Pollard.     He    was 
baptized  by  Andrew  Gibbons. 

HUBBARD,  Wesley  Williams,  Bish- 
op of  the  Williams  Ward,  Bannock 
Stake,  Idaho,  since  1929,  was  born  May 
2,  1902,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Alma  Edward  Hubbard  and  Manna 
Williams.  He  was  baptized  May  2, 
1910,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  27,  1929,  by  David  O. 
McKay.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1924-1926. 

HULSE,  George  Weaver,  Bishop  of 
the  Bench  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1920  to  1922,  was  born  June 
1,  1883,  in  Millville,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Henry  E.  Hulse  and  Mary 
J.  Weaver. 

LLOYD,  Daniel  D„  Bishop  of  the 
Central  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1901  to  1903,  was  born  Feb.  8, 
1863,  in  Farmington,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Lloyd  and  Susanna  Stone.  He 
was  a  successful  pioneer  of  both  Utah 
and  Idaho  and  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1913.  He  was  the  first  Bishop 
of  the  Central  Ward  and  also  served 
as  Bishop  of  the  Mt.  Sterling  Ward 
in  Hyrum  Stake.  He  died  April  1, 
1935. 

McCANN,  Thomas  J.,  acting  Bishop 
of  the  Tm*ner  Ward,  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1926  to  1927,  was  born 
July  14,  1866,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Nephi  McCann  and 
Ellen  Cantwell,  He  was  baptized  July 
25,  1875,  and  was  killed  in  the  explo- 
sion in  the  Turner  Ward  meeting  house 
Jan.  26,  1927. 

McGregor,   Daniel  Wells,   Bishop 

of  the  Mound  Valley  Ward,  Bannock 
Stake,  Idaho,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov. 
10,  1889,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  James  D.  McGregor  and  Mary 
Perry.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  10,  1897, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL   ENCYCLOPEDIA 


399 


Bishop   July    13,    1930,   by   Melvin   J. 
Ballard, 

MICKELSON,  Michael,  Bishop  of 
the  Lago  (Trout  Creek)  Ward,  Ban- 
nock Stake,  Idaho,  from  1919  to  1920, 
and  later  serving  a  second  term  com- 
mencing in  1930,  was  boi-n  Aug.  28, 
1873,  in  Denmark,  the  son  of  Anton 
Peter  Mikkelsen  and  Gitte  Jensen.  He 
emigrated  to  America  in  1881,  was 
baptized  March  3,  1899,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  24,  1906,  by  Jos. 
T.  Pond,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May 
18,  1919,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

PETERSON,  Emil  Ephraim,  Bishop 
of  the  Grace  1st  Ward,  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho,  since  1929,  was  born  March  16, 
1881,  in  Sweden,  the  son  of  Peter 
Peterson  and  Christina  Olson.  He  was 
baptized  May  2,  1889,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1884  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  28,  1929, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

PETERSON,  Nephi,  Bishop  of  the 
Lago  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1915  to  1919,  was  born  Aug.  1, 
1887,  in  Mink  Creek,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
Peter  Peterson  and  Christina  Olson. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1895,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  in  November, 
1914,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  16,  1915,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Sweden  in  1907-1910. 

POULSON,  Christian  Hyrum,  Bish- 
op of  the  Grace  Ward,  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1904  to  1914,  was  born 
April  28,  1859,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Niels  C.  Poulson  and  Helga 
Oleson.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  24, 
1867,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  19,  1904,  by  Hyrum 
M.  Smith.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Den- 
mark and  England  in  1890-1892. 

ROGHAAR,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Grace  2nd  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Idaho, 


since  1920,  was  born  July  29,  1884,  in 
Amsterdam,  Holland,  the  son  of  An- 
dries  Roghaar  and  Grietje  Kater.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  28,  1893,  by  Evert 
Neuteboom,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1895, 
filled  a  mission  to  Holland  in  1904-1907, 
located  in  Grace,  Idaho,  in  1911,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  15,  1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

SMITH,  Elmer  Wilding,  first  counse- 
lor in  the  Bannock  Stake  presidency, 
Idaho,  since  1928,  was  born  Oct.  25, 
1887,  in  Gentile  Valley,  Oneida  Co., 
Idaho,  the  son  of  George  N.  Smith 
and  Mary  Ellen  Woolley.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  7,  1895,  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Sept.  26,  1909,  by  Bishop  N.  D. 
Thatcher,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1909-1912,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Lewis  S.  Pond  Aug.  11, 
1912,  and  was  chosen  as  first  counselor 
to  Pres.  Martin  Ezra  Sorensen  Oct.  28, 
1928. 

SORENSEN,  John  C,  Bishop  of  the 
Lago  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1926  to  1930,  was  born  April  17, 
1882,  in  Trout  Creek,  Gentile  Valley, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  John  P.  Sorensen  and 
Sina  C.  Mickelsen.  He  was  baptized 
May  10,  1890,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  18,  1904,  by  William  W. 
Sterrett  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May 
16,  1926,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

SORENSEN,  Martin  Ezra,  president 
of  the  Bannock  Stake  of  Zion  since 
1928,  was  bom  May  11,  1889,  in  Ovid, 
Bear  Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Mar- 
tin P.  Sorensen  and  Sarah  E.  Walton. 
He  was  baptized  July  18,  1897,  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  May  29,  1910,  by 
James  A.  Hymas,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1910-1912,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  18,  1923,  by 
Hyrum  G.  Smith,  and  served  as  Bishop 
of  the  Central  Ward  from  1926  to  1928; 
he  was  set  apart  as  Stake  president 
Oct.  28,  1928,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

THATCHER,  Howard  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Trout  Creek   (Lago)  Ward,  Ban- 


400 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


nock  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1921, 
and  Bishop  of  the  Thatcher  2nd  Ward 
from  1921  to  1924,  was  born  Dec.  15, 
1873,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
B.  Thatcher  and  Rachel  H.  Davis.  He 
was  baptized  Dec.  15,  1881,  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Aug.  16,  1914,  by 
Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  oi'dained  a  Bish- 
op Nov.  19,  1921. 

THATCHER,  Nathan  Davis,  Bishop 
of  the  Thatcher  Ward,  Bannock  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1907  to  1912,  was  born 
Oct.  3,  1867,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  B.  Thatcher  and  Rachel  Hanna 
Davis.  He  was  baptized  by  Christian 
Larsen,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  11,  1907,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 


Bishop  of  the  whole  valley,  and  when 
the  Saints  in  this  region  were  divided 
into  several  wards,  Bro.  Williams  con- 
tinued in  charge  of  the  Mound  Valley 
Ward. 

WILLIAMS,  William  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  Mound  Valley  Ward,  Bannock 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1902  to  1913,  was 
born  May  18,  1875,  in  Mound  Valley 
(Gentile  Valley),  the  son  of  Robert  H. 
Williams  and  Harriet  Busenbark.  He 
was  baptized  May  18,  1883,  and  was 
oi'dained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Jan.  26,  1902,  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley. 


Bear  Lake  Stake 


THOMAS,  Elisha  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Turner  Ward,  Bannock  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1927  to  1930,  was  born  June 
7,  1873,  at  Harrisville,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Elisha  Thomas  and 
Elizabeth  Lee.  He  was  baptized  Jan. 
22,  1883,  was  ordained  an  Elder  in 
1895,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwest- 
ern States  in  1909-1910,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Nov.  19,  1910,  by  Wm. 
H.  Mendenhall,  and  chosen  as  Bishop 
June  19,  1927. 

WILLIAMS,  Robert  Hanna,  Bishop 
of  the  Mound  Valley  Ward,  Bannock 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1874  to  1891,  was 
born  Dec.  10,  1827,  at  Carmie,  White 
Co.,  Illinois,  the  son  of  Aaron  Williams 
and  Mary  Hanna.  He  came  to  Utah  in 
1852  on  his  way  to  California,  but  be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism"'  he 
joined  the  Church  and  became  a  most 
diligent  and  capable  Church  worker. 
He  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  in 
Providence,  Cache  Co.,  in  1859,  and 
acted  as  Bishop  there  from  1859  to 
1863.  He  was  also  one  of  the  first 
settlers  of  Paris,  Bear  Lake  Valley. 
He  located  in  Gentile  Valley  in  1874, 
as  one  of  the  first  "Mormon"  settlers 
there.  Soon  after  this  he  was  chosen  as 


ALLRED,  Ernest  Wilkes,  Bishop  of 
the  St.  Charles  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  in  1928-1930 +  ,  was  born  June 
16,  1877,  in  St.  Charles,  the  son  of 
William  L.  Allred  and  Sarah  Ann  Wil- 
kes. He  was  baptized  Sept.  6,  1885, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  27,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

AUSTIN,  Torrey  Lynn,  Bishop  of 
the  Liberty  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  in  1929  to  1930  + ,  was  born  Dec. 
9,  1882,  in  Liberty,  the  son  of  Edwin 
N.  Austin  and  Emma  Wood.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  27,  1891,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith 
Nov.  30,  1924,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Jan.  15,  1929,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

CALDER,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the 
Garden  City  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
(Rich  Co.,  Utah),  Idaho,  from  1879  to 
1897,  was  born  Oct.  12,  1834,  in  Edin- 
bux'gh,  Scotland,  the  son  of  Peter  Cal- 
der  and  Ann  Miller.  He  emigrated 
with  his  father's  family  to  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  in  1845,  and  came  to  Utah  in 
1850.  He  was  called  to  Garden  City 
to  act  as  Bishop  in  1879.  He  died 
April  7,  1906,  at  Garden  City. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


401 


COOK,  Clarence,  Bishop  of  the  Gar- 
den City  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  (Rich 
Co.,  Utah),  in  1926-1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  27,  1889,  in  Garden  City,  the  son 
of  David  Savage  Cook  and  Lydia  Ann 
Nelson.  He  was  baptized  July  2,  1898, 
was  ordained  an  Elder  by  Ernest  W. 
Irwin  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States  in  1911-1913,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
27,  1926,  by  Rudger  Clawson, 

CROUCH,  Ebenezer,  Bishop  of  the 
Lanark  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1897  to  1902,  was  born  Sept.  23, 
1850,  in  Tunbridge  Wells,  Kent,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Ebenezer  Crouch  and 
Sarah  Russell.  He  emigrated  with  his 
parents  to  Utah  in  1856,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Samuel  Francis  at 
Morgan,  Utah,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  James  H.  Hart  in  1897. 

FINDLAY,  Alma,  Bishop  of  the 
Bloomington  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1895  to  1914,  was  born 
Dec.  17,  1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Hugh  Findlay  and  Catherine 
A.  Partington.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
1,  1866,  was  called  to  Bloomington 
from  Laketown,  Utah,  to  act  as  Bishop 
over  the  Bloomington  Ward,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  2,  1895,  by  Brigham  Young,  jun. 
He  died  at  Bloomington  April  27, 1936. 

GAMBLING,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Sharon  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Idaho, 
in  1926-1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  27,  1887, 
in  Liberty,  Bear  Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Gambling  and  Eliza- 
beth Alkins.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
18,  1895,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  27,  1926,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

GIBBONS,  Joseph  Weston,  Bishop 
of  the  Garden  City  Ward,  Bear  Lake 
Stake,  (Rich  Co.,  Utah),  Idaho,  from 
1923  to  1926,  was  born  Oct.  10,  1874, 
in  Laketown,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Gibbons  and  Mercy  Weston.     He  was 


baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
in  1905-1907,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op June  3,  1923,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HULME,  John  Philip,  Bishop  of  the 
Bloomington  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  in  1928-1930,  was  born  March 
25,  1884,  in  Bloomington,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  William  Hulme  and  Ann  Maria 
Briscoe.  He  was  baptized  in  June, 
1892,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
5,  1913,  by  Wm.  L.  Rich,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  May  27,  1928  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

HULME,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Bloomington  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1877  to  1894,  was  born 
June  29,  1836,  in  Stoke-on-Trent,  Staf- 
fordshire, England.  He  emigrated  to 
America  about  1842,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  and  England  in 
1880-1882,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Aug.  25, 1877. 

HUMPHERYS,      Hyrum      Thomas, 

Bishop  of  the  Paris  1st  Ward,  Bear 
Lake  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1898  to  1912, 
was  born  May  15,  1850,  in  Mansfield, 
Nottinghamshire,  England,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Humpherys  and  Mary  Sud- 
bury. He  emigrated  to  America  in 
1854,  arrived  in  Utah  in  1856,  located 
in  Paris,  Idaho,  in  1866,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Wm.  L.  Rich,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  in  1899  by  Heber  J. 
Grant.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern   States   in   1887-1888. 

HYMAS,  Ernest  David,  Bishop  of 
the  Lanark  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  in  1921-1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb. 
4,  1883,  in  Liberty,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
James  Hymas  and  Sarah  C.  Evans.  He 
was  baptized  April  6,  1891,  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  1905  by  Robert 
Price,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1905-1907,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  30,  1908,  by  James  Nye 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  28,  1921, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 


Vol.  IV.  No.  2G 


June  27,  1936 


402 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


HYMAS,  James,  Bishop  of  the  Lan- 
ark Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1904  to  1908,  was  born  March 
14,  1849,  in  Raleigh,  Essex,  England, 
the  son  of  William  Hymas  and  Mary 
Ann  Alkins.  He  emigrated  to  Ameri- 
ca in  1861,  arrived  in  Utah  in  1862,  lo- 
cated in  Bear  Lake  Valley  in  1864,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  in  1904. 

HYMAS,  Samuel  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Sharon  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1901  to  1926,  was  born  Dec.  10, 
1867,  in  Liberty,  Bear  Lake  Co.,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  William  A.  Hymas  and 
Mary  Edwards.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  April,  1901,  by  James  H. 
Hart,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  June  23, 
1901,  by  George  Teasdale.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northwestern  States  in 
1898-1900. 

KIMBALL,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the 
Meadowville  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
(Rich  Co.,  Utah),  Idaho,  from  1876  to 
1892,  was  born  Dec.  22,  1851,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Heber  C. 
Kimball  and  Prescinda  Lathrop  Hunt- 
ington. He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  and  located  in  Mea- 
dowville in  1869.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Aug.  26,  1877,  by  Albert  Car- 
rington.  Elder  Kimball  died  March 
29,  1936,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

LINDSAY,  James  Clarence,  Bishop 
of  the  Ovid  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1917  to  1918,  was  born 
February  22,  1873,  in  Paris,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  Philemon  Lindsay  and 
Marintha  Athay,  He  was  baptized 
July  10,  1882,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  19,  1915,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  23,  1917,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith. 

LOW,  Morris  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Paris  2nd  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1919  to  1922,  was  born 
March  2,  1887,  in  Paris,  Bear  Lake  Co., 
Idaho,  the  son  of  David  Nelson  Low 


and  Sarah  Jane  Matthews.  He  was 
baptized  June  6,  1895,  ordained  an  El- 
der Sept.  15, 1907,  by  Jos.  R.  Shepherd, 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  in 
1907-1910,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
June  22,  1919,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

NIELSEN,  Lars  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Ovid  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Idaho 
from  1915  to  1916,  was  born  Jan.  9, 
1861,  in  Dronninglund,  Hjorring  amt, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Anders  M.  Nielsen 
and  Marie  A.  Sorensen.  He  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1869,  was  baptized  in 
Huntsville,  Utah,  in  1869,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1888-1890,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  November 
1890,  by  Wm.  Budge,  and  a  Bishop  Dec. 
19,  1915,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.  Bishop 
Nielsen  was  accidentally  killed  Dec.  6, 
1916. 

PETERSON,  John  T.,  Bishop  of  the 
Ovid  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1918  to  1925,  was  born  Oct.  10, 
1870,  in  Ovid,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Thomas 
C.  Peterson  and  Casty  Peterson.  He 
was  baptized  July  27,  1879,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  13,  1908, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  June  22,  1918. 

PETERSON,  Oliver  Lome,  Bishop 
of  the  Ovid  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  in  1925-1930 +  ,  was  born  April 
12,  1888,  at  Ovid,  the  son  of  Andrew  H. 
Peterson  and  Mary  S.  Larsen.  He  was 
baptized  July  2,  1896,  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  called  on  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  in  1899,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  3,  1923,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Nov.  22,  1925,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

POPE,  Charles  Wallace,  Bishop  of 
the  Garden  City  Ward,  Bear  Lake 
Stake,  (Rich  Co.,  Utah),  Idaho,  from 
1910  to  1923,  was  born  Dec.  27,  1872, 
in  Randolph,  Rich  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Charles  Holmes  Pope  and  Sarah 
Maria  McCann.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  was  ordained  a  High 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


403 


Priest  in  August,  1900,  by  James  H. 
Hart,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  11,  1910,  by 
Jos.  R.  Shepherd. 

POPE,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the  Fish 
Haven  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1877  to  1882,  was  born  June  16, 
1828,  in  London,  England,  the  son  of 
Robert  Pope  and  Rebecca  Pope.  He 
emigrated  with  his  parents  to  the 
United  States  about  1830,  and  arrived 
in  Utah  in  1858,  accompanying  the 
American  missionaries  returning  home. 
He  was  the  only  L.  D.  S.  man  who 
brought  a  wife  with  him  across  the 
Plains  that  spring.  Locating  in  Bear 
Lake  Valley,  he  was  among  the  first 
settlers  of  St.  Charles.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  26,  1877. 

PRICE,  Daniel  Shepherd,  Bishop  of 
the  Paris  2nd  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1922  to  1927,  was  born 
Feb.  3, 1880,  in  Paris,  the  son  of  Robert 
Price  and  Christina  Shepherd.  He  was 
baptized  May  3,  1888,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Feb.  24,  1923,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards. 

PRICE,  Isaac  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Round  Valley  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake, 
Rich  Co.,  Utah,  from  1892  to  1912,  was 
born  Oct.  26,  1855,  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio, 
the  son  of  John  Isaac  Price  and  Mary 
Ann  Wingrove.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
with  his  parents  in  1862,  was  baptized 
in  1864,  and  settled  in  Round  Valley  in 
1870.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  May  10, 1893,  by  Geo.  Teas- 
dale.     He  died  May  5,  1912. 

PUGMIRE,  Edward  McKay,  Bishop 
of  the  St.  Charles  Ward,  Bear  Lake 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1906  to  1914,  was 
born  Oct.  20,  1861,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jonathan  Pugmire 
and  Elizabeth  McKay.  He  was  baptized 
June  20,  1870,  located  in  Bear  Lake 
Valley  with  his  parents  in  1864,  being 
one  of  the  first  settlers  of  St.  Charles; 
filled  a   mission   to   Great   Britain  in 


1893-1894,  and  a  mission  to  California 
in  1902-1903.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Wm.  Budge  and  a  Bishop 
Dec.  2,  1907,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

RICH,  Daniel  Coulsen,  Bishop  of  the 
Paris  1st  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  31,  1884,  in  Paris,  the  son  of 
Amasa  Mason  Rich  and  Mary  Eliza- 
beth Jacobs.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  4, 
1892,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  May  7, 
1904,  by  Wm.  L.  Rich,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1904-1906.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  21, 
1919,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Feb.  24,  1923,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

SCHOFIELD,  Hyrum  Peter,  Bishop 
of  the  Fish  Haven  Ward,  Bear  Lake 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1893  to  1903,  was 
born  Jan.  21,  1862,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  S.  Schofield 
and  Annie  C.  Nelson.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  16,  1893,  by  James 
H.  Hart,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov. 
4,  1893,  by  Wm.  Budge. 

SHEPHERD,  Edwin  Tracy,  Bishop 
of  the  Paris  2nd  Ward,  Bear  Lake 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930  + ,  was 
born  Sept.  30,  1882,  in  Paris,  Bear  Lake 
Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Lorenzo  Tracy 
Shepherd  and  Sarah  Clifton.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  30,  1890,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  22,  1919,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  27,  1919, 
by  Geo.  A.  Smith. 

SPENCER,  George  Boardman,  Bish- 
op of  the  Paris  1st  Ward,  Bear  Lake 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1881  to  1885,  was 
born  Feb.  21,  1840,  in  Middlefield, 
Mass.,  the  son  of  Orson  Spencer  and 
Catherine  Curtis.  He  was  baptized  in 
1849,  moved  to  Paris  in  1874,  was 
chosen  as  Bishop  in  1882  and  served 
until  1885.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1873,  filled  a  mission  to  Switz- 
erland in  1864-1867,  and  from  1867  to 


404 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


1871  filled  a  special  mission  to  the 
Muddy  Valley.  On  Aug.  7,  1881,  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  John  Taylor. 

STOCK,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Fish 
Haven  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1882  to  1893,  was  born  Oct.  12, 
1820,  in  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  South 
Africa,  the  son  of  Robert  Stock  and 
Susanna  Pierce.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
14, 1855,  by  Leonard  I.  Smith,  emigrat- 
ed to  America  in  1860,  settled  in  Bear 
Lake  Valley  in  1864,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  14,  1877,  and  a 
Bishop  Aug.  9,  1882,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.     He  died  Oct.  18,  1896. 

STOCK,  John  William  Edwin,  Bish- 
op of  the  Fish  Haven  Ward,  Bear  Lake 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1903  to  1917,  was 
born  Dec.  20,  1844,  in  Port  Ehzabeth, 
Cape  Colony,  South  Africa,  the  son 
of  John  Stock  and  Jane  Adams.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  25,  1855,  at  Port 
Elizabeth,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1800, 
located  in  Bear  Lake  Valley  in  1864, 
and  settled  in  Fish  Haven  in  1866.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  9, 
1882,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  28,  1904,  by 
Rudger  Clawson.  He  died  Sept.  7, 
1932. 

STUCKI,  Ezra  Spori,  Bishop  of  the 
Paris  1st  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1920  to  1922,  was  born  Feb. 
25,  1895,  in  Paris,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
John  U.  Stucki  and  Anna  Clara  Spori. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  25,  1903,  was 
ordained  an  Elder  by  his  father,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1914-1917,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  24,  1919,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

W^ELKER,  Roy  Anson,  pi-esident  of 
the  Bear  Lake  Stake  of  Zion  from  1922 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  9,  1878,  in 
Bloomington,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Adam 
P.  Welker  and  Clara  Osmond.  He  was 
baptized  in  June,  1887,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty May  14,  1901,  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 


ball and  filled  a  mission  to  Germany 
in  1901-1904.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  30,  1917,  by  Jos.  R.  Shep- 
herd, and  set  apart  as  president  of  the 
Stake  Nov.  26,  1922,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

WESTON,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the 
Garden  City  Ward,  Bear  Lake  Stake 
(Rich  Co.,  Utah),  Idaho,  from  1897  to 
1910,  was  born  Jan.  27,  1865,  in  Wool- 
ley,  Somersetshire,  England,  the  son  of 
Nehemiah  Weston  and  Rosanna  Gif- 
ford.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his 
parents  in  1870,  settled  in  Laketown, 
Utah,  and  moved  to  Garden  City  in 
May,  1897.  He  was  baptized  in  the 
spz-ing  of  1873  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  20,  1897, 
by  William  Budge. 


Bear  River  Stake 

ARCHIBALD,      Thomas      Halliday, 

Bishop  of  the  Plymouth  Ward,  Bear 
River  Stake,  (Box  Elder  Co.)  Utah, 
from  1891  to  1913,  was  born  Jan.  24, 
1858,  in  Croftheath,  Linniskinshire, 
Scotland,  the  son  of  William  Russell 
Archibald  and  Elizabeth  Halliday.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  parents  in 
1853,  located  in  Plymouth  in  1885,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Lorenzo 
Snow  June  15,  1891. 

BICKMORE,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Penrose  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1921,  was  born  Oct. 
15,  1878,  in  Paradise,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  David  N.  Bickmore  and 
Elizabeth  N.  Arthur.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  7,  1886,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  5,  1920,  by 
Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

BIGLER,  James  Thaddeus,  Bishop 
of  the  Riverside  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1923,  was 
born  Jan.  22,  1868,  in  Farmington,  Da- 
vis Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Adam  Bigler 
and  Isabella  Miller.    He  was  baptized 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


405 


when  about  eight  years  old.  He  moved 
to  the  so-called  Bear  River  Flat  about 
1885,  w^as  ordained  an  Elder  and  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1909- 
1911,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  23,  1919,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

CLARK,  Joseph  Smith,  Bishop  of 
the  Fielding  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1906  to  1913,  was  born 
Aug.  30,  1878,  in  Farmington,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  S.  Clark 
and  Lucy  Maria  Robinson.  He  was 
baptized  in  July,  1887,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
Rudger  Clawson  Oct.  14,  1906. 

DEWEY,  Charles  Jesse,  Bishop  of 
the  Deweyville  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1926,  was 
born  May  23, 1879,  in  Deweyville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  C.  Dewey  and  Mary 
Allen.  He  was  baptized  May  23,  1887, 
and  after  being  ordained  a  Seventy 
Oct.  8, 1900,  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1900-1903;  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  in  1911,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  June  26,  1920,  by  Anthony 
W.  Ivins. 

DURFEY,  Francillo,  jun.,  presiding 
Elder  and  Bishop  of  Beaver  Dam  Ward, 
Bear  River  Stake,  Utah,  from  1872  to 
1908,  was  born  Feb.  1,  1850,  at  Mound 
Fort,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Francillo  Durfey  and  Cintha  Harring- 
ton. He  was  baptized  in  February, 
1858,  in  Fort  Limhi,  Oregon  (now  Ida- 
ho), came  to  Beaver  Dam,  Utah,  with 
his  father's  family  in  1868,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  27,  1892. 

GARN,  Micah  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Fielding  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept.  13, 
1869,  in  Centerville,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Micah  Gam  and  Fannie 
Wood.  He  was  baptized  in  May,  1881, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 


in  1907-1909,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  24,  1930,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

GROVER,  Walter  L.,  Bishop  of  the 
Garland  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1898  to  1908,  was  born  Dec.  25, 
1860,  in  Farmington,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Thomas  Grover  and  Eliza- 
beth Walker.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  15,  1898, 
by  Rudger  Clawson.  He  presided  over 
the  Sunset  Branch  (later  Garland 
Ward)  from  1893  to  1898. 

GUNNELL,  Charles  Brown,  Bishop 
of  the  Howell  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930,  was  born 
March  5,  1887,  in  Wellsville,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Charles  E.  Gun- 
nell  and  Sarah  Ann  Brown.  He  was 
baptized  June  6,  1895,  was  ordained  an 
Elder  March  23,  1903,  by  Daniel  I. 
Stewart  and  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1909-1911;  he  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  11,  1928, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HANSEN,  Eugene  Severin,  Bishop 
of  the  East  Garland  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1930,  was 
born  Feb.  21,  1881,  in  Collinston,  Box 
Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Willard 
Snow  Hansen  and  Maria  Larsen.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old  in 
Brigham  City.  After  being  ordained 
an  Elder  by  Charles  Kelly,  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Noi'thwestern  States  in 
1902-1904,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
March  23,  1919,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

HESS,  James  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Fielding  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1894  to  1906,  w«s  born 
March  6,  1858,  in  Farmington,  Davis 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  W,  Hess 
and  Mary  Ann  Steed.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1883,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  Oct.  14,  1894. 
He  died  March  11,  1931. 


406 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


HOLMAN,  Lester  Melvin,  Bishop  of 
the  East  Garland  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  in  1930  + ,  was  born  Aug. 
2,  1886,  in  Fountain  Green,  Sanpete 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  James  Isaac  Hol- 
man  and  Lucy  J.  Johnson.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  2,  1894,  and  after  being  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Australia  in  1915-1916;  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  23,  1919, 
and  a  Bishop  Aug.  24,  1930,  by  Rud- 
ger  Clawson. 

JENSEN,  Joseph,  second  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1908  to  1917,  was 
born  Nov.  29,  1868,  at  Mantua,  Box 
Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Peter  Jen- 
sen and  Anne  Marie  Hansen.  He  was 
baptized  March  25,  1877,  and  when  the 
Bear  River  Stake  was  organized  Oct. 
11,  1908,  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  to  Pres.  Milton  H.  Welling 
and  set  apart  to  that  position  by  Rud- 
ger  Clawson. 

JOHNSON,  Hans  George,  Bishop  of 
the  East  Garland  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1915  to  1918,  was 
born  Oct.  17,  1881,  in  Deweyville,  Box 
Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  George 
Johnson  and  Margaret  Sorensen.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Feb.  21,  1915,  by  George 
Albert  Smith.  Bishop  Johnson  died 
Dec.  14,  1918. 

JOSEPHSON,  Mahonri  M.,  Bishop 
of  the  Plymouth  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1923,  was 
born  Nov.  21,  1893,  in  Plymouth,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Josephson  and  Sarah  E. 
Zundel.  He  was  baptized  June  1,  1902, 
by  Thomas  J.  Nish,  located  at  Ply- 
mouth in  1921,  filled  a  mission  to 
Holland  in  1916-1919,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  3, 
1922,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard.  He  was 
killed  Oct.  17,  1923. 

KENNARD,  Leonidas  Hamlin,  jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Riverside  Ward,  Bear 


River  Stake,  Utah,  from  1914  to  1919, 
was  bom  Oct.  26,  1869,  in  Farmington, 
Davis  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  L.  H.  Ken- 
nard,  sen.,  and  Johanna  L.  Gleason.  He 
was  baptized  in  1878,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty July  18,  1896,  by  Geo.  Teasdale, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Society.  Islands 
in  1896-1899  and  another  mission  in 
1920-1922,  as  president  of  the  mission. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  July  22, 
1902,  by  Milton  H.  Welling  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  March  1,  1914,  by  James 
E.  Talmage.  (See  also  Society  Islands 
Mission.) 

MARBLE,  Daniel  Burbank,  Bishop 
of  the  Deweyville  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1911  to  1913,  was 
born  July  20,  1868,  in  Brigham  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Henry  Lyman  Marble 
and  Mary  Lydia  Burbank.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  16,  1877,  in  Deweyville, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Oleen  N. 
Stohl  Aug.  2,  1908,  and  acted  as  a 
counselor  to  Bishop  Geo.  Carlos  Dewey 
until  Aug.  20, 1911,  when  he  was  chosen 
as  Bishop  of  the  Deweyville  Ward. 

MARBLE,  Daniel  Milton,  Bishop  of 
the  Bothwell  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  25,  1895,  in  Deweyville,  Box  El- 
der Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Daniel  B. 
Marble  and  Mary  A.  Hanson.  He  was 
baptized  April  28,  1903,  by  Geo.  H. 
Tibbitts;  after  being  ordained  an  Elder 
he  went  to  Holland  as  a  missionary, 
but  on  account  of  the  World  war  his 
field  of  labor  was  changed  to  the 
United  States.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  10,  1929, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

NELSON,  James,  jun.,  Bishop  of  the 
Thatcher  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1902  to  1911,  was  born  Feb. 
3,  1857,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jens 
Nelson  and  Marie  M.  Neilsen.  He  was 
baptized  in  Brigham  City  in  July,  1866, 
and  after  being  ordained  a  Seventy  he 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1891- 
1893,     After  locating  in  Thatcher  in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


407 


March,  1901,  he  was  appointed  pre- 
siding Elder  on  the  west  side  of  the 
Bothwell  Ward  in  the  spring  of  1904, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  24,  1902,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son.     He  died  Jan.  16,  1911. 

NISH,  Robert  T.,  Bishop  of  the  Ply- 
mouth Ward,  Bear  River  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1923  to  1930,  was  born  Nov.  19, 
1884,  in  East  Portage,  Box  Elder  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  J.  Nish  and 
Sarah  Ann  Tims.  He  was  baptized 
July  15,  1893,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  3,  1922,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman, 
and  sustained  as  Bishop  Dec.  9,  1923. 

PERRY,  Marion  Gilbert,  Bishop  of 
the  Deweyville  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930  + ,  was 
born  Dec.  11,  1887,  at  Slaterville,  We- 
ber Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Stephen 
Washington  Perry,  jun.,  and  Laura 
Etta  Rogers.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  6, 
1896,  by  his  father,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  22, 
1926. 

PETERSEN,  Ole,  Bishop  of  the 
Fielding  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1918  to  1922,  was  born 
March  14,  1863,  in  Tjustrup,  Soro  amt, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Rasmus  Petersen 
and  Anna  Kierstine  Christensen.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1876,  and,  after 
residing  in  different  places,  he  located 
in  Clarkston,  Cache  Valley,  Utah,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1888- 
1890.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  22,  1902,  by  Alma  Merrill,  moved 
to  Fielding  in  1910,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  March  23,  1919,  by  George 
Albert  Smith. 

PIERCE,  Peter  Nelson,  Bishop  of 
the  Penrose  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1911  to  1917,  was  born 
April  7,  1865,  at  Billingsby,  Sweden, 
the  son  of  Benjamin  Pierce  and  Han- 
nah Nelson.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  6,  1911,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant. 


PIERSON,  Harmon  Dudley,  Bishop 
of  the  Plymouth  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1880  to  1884,  was 
born  in  April,  1816,  in  Connecticut,  the 
son  of  Daniel  Pierson  and  Julia  Lester. 
He  joined  the  Church  at  an  early  day, 
located  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  and 
came  to  Utah  with  the  so-called  sick 
detachment  of  said  Battalion  in  1847. 
He  died  July  3,  1892,  in  North  Ply- 
mouth. 

RICHARDS,  Ralph  C,  Bishop  of  the 
Riverside  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1926,  was  born 
April  14,  1886,  in  Plymouth  (now 
Fielding),  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Myron  J.  Richards  and  Julia  Ann 
Peterson.  He  was  baptized  April  14, 
1894,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  23, 
1915,  by  David  O.  McKay,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  June  2,  1923,  by  Rud- 
ger Clawson. 

RICHARDS,  Wilford  Woodruff,  jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Garland  Ward,  Bear 
River  Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  June  5,  1891,  in 
Farmington,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Wilford  Woodruff  Richards  and 
Emily  Randall.  He  was  baptized  June 
6,  1899,  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  23, 
1910,  by  Chas.  H.  Hart,  filled  a  mission 
to  California  in  1919-1921,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  24,  1927,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

STOKES,  Joseph  M.,  Bishop  of  the 
Bothwell  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1900  to  1907  and  in  1909- 
1913,  was  born  Oct.  12,  1864,  in  Rich- 
mond, Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
William  and  Mary  Ann  Stokes.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old  and  after  acting  as  presiding  Elder 
for  some  time  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  26,  1898,  by 
Lorenzo  Snow.    He  died  July  11,  1915. 

WATT,  Richard  Golightly,  Bishop  of 
the  Thatcher  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake. 


408 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  from  1911  to  1924,  was  bom  Nov. 
26,  1860,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  George  D.  Watt  and  Elizabeth 
Golightly.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  23, 
1886,  by  Henry  Thornley,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Heber 
J.  Grant  May  6,  1911.  He  died  Oct. 
6,  1933. 

WELLING,  Joseph  Harriman,  Bish- 
op of  the  Riverside  Ward,  Bear  River 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1911  to  1914,  was 
born  June  21,  1870,  in  Farmington, 
Davis  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Job  Welling 
and  Marretta  Holmes.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  27,  1879,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  in  1901-1902,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  18,  1898, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bishop  Feb. 
18,  1911.  He  died  in  Brigham  City, 
Utah,  Oct.  13,  1925. 

WIGHT,  Almon  Nelson,  Bishop  of 
the  Thatcher  Ward,  Bear  River  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  19,  1885,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Almon  Lyman  Wight  and 
Mariane  Nielsen.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  of  age,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  11,  1924,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 


Beaver  Stake 

ADAMS,  David  Barclay,  Bishop  of 
the  Greenville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1869  to  1872,  was  bom 
May  4,  1814,  in  Scotland.  He  was 
baptized  April  6,  1844,  by  Joseph 
Clemens,  emigrated  and  located  in 
Beaver.  On  March  20,  1869,  he  was 
appointed  Bishop  of  the  Beaver  3rd 
Ward,  comprising  Greenville  and 
Adamsville,  and  presided  thus  until 
Jan.  15,  1872.    He  died  Aug.  4,  1881. 

BAKER,  Henry  Friend,  Bishop  of 
the  Minersville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1906  to  1908,  was  born 
Nov.  20,  1867,  in  Minersville,  the  son 
of  William  Baker  and  Frances  Friend. 


He  was  baptized  Aug.  9, 1877,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Francis  M.  Lyman  in 
June,  1894,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1902-1903,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Oct.  15,  1906,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 

BIRD,  Edwin  Harry,  Bishop  of  the 
Milford  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1928,  was  born  April  21, 
1883,  in  Nephi,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Harry  E.  Bird  and  Martha  Jane 
Reed.  He  was  baptized  in  1891,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  19,  1909,  by 
Jacob  T.  Tanner,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Oct.  24,  1920,  by  Patriarch  Hyrum  G. 
Smith. 

CUTLER,  Ross  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Adamsville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1923  to  1924,  was  born  Feb.  10, 
1876,  in  Glendale,  Kane  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Royal  James  Cutler  and  Mar- 
garet Butler.  He  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  Feb.  17, 
1897,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
15,  1906,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  July 
29,  1923,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

DOTSON,  Reuben  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Minersville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1901  to  1906,  was  born  Nov. 
29,  1854,  in  Atlanta,  Miss.,  the  son  of 
Wm.  L.  H.  Dotson  and  Henrietta  Lan- 
drum.  He  was  baptized  March  19, 
1879,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan. 
6,  1902,  by  Abraham  0.  Woodruff.  He 
died  Oct.  1,  1928. 

EASTON,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the 
Greenville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1872  to  1880,  was  born  July  25, 
1822,  at  Cardrie,  Scotland,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  March  24,  1872,  by  Wm. 
Fotheringham.  He  died  May  25,  1887, 
at  Greenville,  Utah. 

EYRE,  George  Hopkins,  Bishop  of 
the  Minersville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1928,  was  bom 
April  22,  1866,  in  Minersville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  George  Eyre  and  Rebecca 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


409 


Hopkins.  He  was  baptized  in  1875  by 
Robert  Easton,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  15,  1906,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  22, 
1919,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

FARRER,  Wesley  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Beaver  West  Wai-d,  Beaver 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  April  29,  1886,  in  Beaver,  the  son 
of  James  Wesley  Farrer  and  Mary 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  4,  1894, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
in  1908-1910,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  20,  1913,  by  Patriarch  Hy- 
rum  G.  Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards  Oct.  10,  1925. 

GRIFFITHS,  Thomas  Lewis,  Bishop 
of  the  Adamsville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1906  to  1911,  was  born  Oct. 
6,  1873,  in  Lehi,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  E.  Griffiths  and  Margaret 
Jones.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  6,  1882, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  South  Africa  in 
1903-1905.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Jan.  15,  1906,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

GUNN,  Thomas  William,  president 
of  the  Beaver  Stake,  Beaver  Co.,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  5, 
3881,  in  Adamsville,  Beaver  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Frederick  Thomas  Gunn  and 
Sarah  Ann  Rees.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 

3,  1890,  ordained  an  Elder  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1906-1908,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  20,  1919,  and  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Beaver  Stake  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards  July  20,  1925. 

HARRIS,  Louis  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Beaver  East  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1905  to  1909,  was  born  Jan. 

4,  1889,  in  Beaver,  the  son  of  Louis 
W,  Harris  and  Annie  Bakes.  He  was 
baptized  June  3,  1897,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Jan.  22,  1905,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 

HORTON,  John  Alma,  Bishop  of  the 
Greenville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 


from  1913  to  1915,  was  born  May  17, 
1872,  in  Greenville,  the  son  of  George 
Horton  and  Sarah  Ann  Butler.  He  was 
baptized  when  10  years  old  by  John  M. 
Easton,  ordained  an  Elder,  and  later  a 
High  Priest,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1908-1910,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  July  19,  1913,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith. 

JOHNSON,  Charles,  Bishop  of  the 
Adamsville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  May  26, 
1882,  at  Ashton-under-Lyne,  Lanca- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  Samuel 
Johnson  and  Jane  Bednal.  He  emi- 
grated with  his  parents  to  Utah  in 
1890,  and  located  in  Manti,  was  bap- 
tized in  September,  1890,  by  Peter 
Westenskow,  removed  to  Adamsville  in 
1896,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  July 
20, 1919,  by  Patriarch  Hyrum  G.  Smith, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  10,  1925, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

JOHNSON,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the 
Adamsville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1913  to  1914,  was  born  Oct.  11, 
1845,  in  Stockport,  Cheshire,  England, 
the  son  of  Thomas  Johnson  and  Han- 
nah Ashton.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  17,  1911,  by  David  H.  Can- 
non, and  sustained  as  Bishop  April  27, 
1913.     He  died  March  3,  1925. 

JOSEPH,  Joseph  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Adamsville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1876  to  1886,  was  born  Nov. 
17, 1830,  in  Stannely,  Carmarthenshire, 
Wales,  the  son  of  Henry  Joseph  and 
Ann  Thomas.  He  was  baptized  in 
1849,  located  in  Adamsville  in  1867, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  prior  to 
Jan.  6,  1876.    He  died  Dec.  17,  1907. 

LILLYWHITE,  Benjamin,  Bishop  of 
the  Greenville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1880  to  1885,  was  born 
Sept.  25,  1843,  the  son  of  Benjamin 
and  Margaret  Lillywhite.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  April  11,  1880,  by 
John    R.   Murdock. 


410 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


MARSHALL,  George,  jun.,  Bishop  of 
the  Minersville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  9,  1881,  in  Minersville,  the  son  of 
George  Marshall  and  Rachel  Thrower. 
He  was  baptized  July  6, 1890,  and  after 
being  ordained  an  Elder  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1901-1903; 
he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
15,  1906,  by  Francis  Marion  Lyman, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  3,  1929,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

McKNIGHT,  James,  acting  Bishop 
of  the  Minersville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1866  to  1869  and  Bishop 
from  1869  to  1877,  was  born  June  8, 
1830,  in  Kirk  Connell,  Dunfreyshire, 
Scotland,  the  son  of  Robei-t  McKnight 
and  Ellen  Richie.  He  emigrated  to 
Australia  in  1848,  was  baptized  by 
Chas.  W.  Wandell  in  1851,  labored  as 
a  missionary  in  Australia,  and  emi- 
grated to  America  in  1854.  He  settled 
in  Minersville  in  1866,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  March  12,  1869,  by  Eras- 
tus  Snow. 

MILLER,  William  Archibald,  Bishop 
of  the  Milford  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930,  was  born 
March  11,  1875,  at  Greenville,  Beaver 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  David  Miller  and 
Margaret  Fife.  He  was  baptized 
March  18,  1883,  by  Wm.  Edwards,  lo- 
cated in  Milford  in  1899,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  April  20,  1913,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  19,  1928,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

MURDOCK,  Reuben  Chase,  first 
counselor  in  the  Beaver  Stake  Presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  June  22,  1894,  in  Beaver,  the 
son  of  Geo.  C.  Murdock  and  Caroline 
Farnsworth.  He  was  baptized  July  13, 
1903,  ordained  an  Elder  May  31,  1913, 
by  F.  D.  Farnsworth,  filled  a  mission 
to  New  Zealand  in  1913-1915,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  17,  1916, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  set  apart  as 


first  counselor  July  18,  1925,  by  Steph- 
en L.  Richards. 

PAIGE,  George,  Bishop  of  the  Bea- 
ver West  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1918  to  1925,  was  born  Jan.  13, 

1870,  at  Lasham,  Hampshire,  England, 
the  son  of  George  Paice  and  Louise 
Weston.  He  emigrated  to  America  in 
1888  and  located  temporarily  in  Wis- 
consin, came  to  Utah  in  1890  and  lo- 
cated in  Beaver.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism,"  he  was  baptized  Aug. 
11,  1890,  filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1897-1899,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  22,  1905,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  April  20,  1919, 
by  David  0.  McKay. 

PARKINSON,  George  Arthur,  Bish- 
op of  the  Adamsville  Ward,  Beaver 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1925,  was 
born  May  21,  1866,  in  Beaver,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Thomas  Parkinson  and  Mary 
A.  Bryant.  He  was  baptized  March 
4,  1877,  by  his  father,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Oct.  12,  1924,  by  John  A. 
Widtsoe. 

REES,  David  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Adamsville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1911  to  1914,  was  born  June  18, 

1871,  at  Adamsville,  the  son  of  David 
D.  Rees  and  Elizabeth  Grimshaw.  He 
was  baptized  June  15,  1880,  by  his 
father,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
22,  1911,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

REES,  Willard  Arthur,  Bishop  of  the 
Adamsville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1919  to  1923,  was  born  Jan.  27, 
1876,  in  Adamsville,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Watkin  Rees  and  Jane  Williams.  He 
was  baptized  May  18,  1884,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  18,  1915,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith,  Jan.,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  20,  1919,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

ROLLINS,  James  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Minersville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1860  to  1869,  was  born  May 
27,  1816,  in  Lima,  Livingston  Co.,  New 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


411 


York,  the  son  of  John  P.  Rollins  and 
Keziah  Van  Benthuizen.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  June,  1832,  in  Rock  Creek, 
Jackson  Co.,  Missouri,  by  John  Car- 
roll, came  to  Utah  in  1848,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  7,  1860,  by 
Amasa  M.  Lyman.  He  died  Jan.  7, 
1899,  at  Bridger,  Wyoming. 


WHITE,  Charles  Dennis,  jun.,  Bish- 
op of  the  Beaver  East  Ward,  Beaver 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1923  and 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
27,  1881,  in  Beaver,  the  son  of  Charles 
D.  White  and  Mary  A.  Greenwood.  He 
was  oi'dained  a  Bishop  July  20,  1919, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 


STEWART,  William  Urban,  Bishop 
of  the  Adamsville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1914  to  1919,  was  born 
Oct.  10,  1868,  in  Beaver,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Urban  Van  Stewart  and  Mary 
Ann  Jones.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  16,  1915,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

TANNER,  Ebenezer,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Milford  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1906  to  1909,  was  born  Aug.  8, 
1869,  in  Holden,  Millard  Co'.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Ebenezer  Tanner  and  Mary  Ann 
Biglei'.  He  was  baptized  by  Ansel 
Harmon  when  about  eight  years  old 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  15,  1906, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

TANNER,  Jacob  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
the  Milford  Ward,  Beaver  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1904  to  1906,  was  born  May  6, 
1871,  at  Holden,  Millard  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Ebenezer  Tanner  and  Mary  Ann 
Bigler.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1901-1903,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Jan.  11,  1904,  by 
Abraham  O.  Woodruff. 

TOLTON,  John  Carlisle,  second 
counselor  in  the  Beaver  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1925  to  1930,  was 
born  Oct.  3,  1889,  at  Beaver,  the  son 
of  John  F.  Tolton  and  Caroline  0. 
Hales.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  9,  1898, 
ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  12,  1908,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
1909-1911,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  1913,  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Beaver  Stake  July  20,  1925, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 


WHITE,  Samuel  Orson,  jun..  Bishop 
of  the  Beaver  West  Ward,  Beaver 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1905  to  1908,  was 
born  April  6,  1877,  in  Beaver,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Samuel  Orson  White  and 
Mary  Ellen  Woodhouse.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  6,  1885,  by  his  father,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  and  North- 
ern States  in  1898-1901,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  11,  1903,  by  Geo. 
Teasdale,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan. 
22,   1905,  by  Francis  M.   Lyman. 

WILLIAMS,  George  R.,  Bishop  of 
the  Minersville  Ward,  Beaver  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1919,  was  born  May 
5,  1880,  in  Greenville,  Beaver  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  David  Williams  and 
Margaret  Reese.  He  was  baptized 
May  3,  1888,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Oct.  28,  1917,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 


Benson  Stake 


ANDERSEN,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Richmond  Ward,  Benson  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1922  to  1930  + ,  was  born  June  13, 
1873,  in  Richmond,  the  son  of  Jorgen 
(George)  Anderson  and  Armina  Car- 
son. He  was  baptized  Oct.  4,  1881, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern  States 
in  1896-1899,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  1,  1908,  by  Thomas 
Moore,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  July  23, 
1922,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

BAIR,  Hyrum  Lester,  Bishop  of  the 
Coveville  Waid,  Benson  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1917  to  1930,  was  born  Sept.  29, 
1872,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Hyrum  Bair  and  Mary  E.  Van  Orden. 
He  was  baptized  May  3,  1883,  filled  a 


412 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1894- 
1896,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
24,  1909,  and  a  Bishop  April  22,  1917, 
by  David  0.  McKay. 

CHRISTOFFERSON,  Moses,  Bishop 
of  the  Cornish  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  18,  1890,  the  son  of  John  C.  Chris- 
tofferson  and  Madie  Madson.  He  was 
baptized  May  7,  1899  antl  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  5, 
1929,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

DANIELSEN,  Herman  Hans,  Bish- 
op of  the  Lewiston  2nd  Ward,  Benson 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1907  to  1921,  was 
box-n  Aug.  3,  1862,  in  Bogelund,  Soro 
amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Daniel  Ras- 
mussen  and  Marie  Hendriksen.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1878,  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  19,  1878,  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia  in  1903-1905,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Sept.  14,  1905, 
by  Alma  Merrill,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  1,  1907,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

FUNK,  Hans,  Bishop  of  the  Newton 
Ward,  Benson  Stake,  Utah,  from  1884 
to  1892,  was  born  May  15,  1839,  on  the 
island  of  Bornholm,  Denmark,  the  son 
of  Frederik  E.  Funk  and  Kirsten  Mad- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  4,  1855, 
by  Chr.  G.  Larsen,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1861,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  11,  1884,  by  Wm.  B.  Preston. 

FUNK,  James  William,  president  of 
the  Benson  Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  19,  1874,  in 
Richmond,  Utah,  the  son  of  Chris- 
topher Funk  and  Annie  Kofod.  He 
was  baptized  June  1,  1882,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  April  30,  1900, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  Benson  Stake  Oct. 
23,  1921,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

GRIFFIN,  William  Hyrum,  Bishop 
of  the  Newton  Ward,  Benson  Stake. 


Utah,  from  1882  to  1893,  was  born 
Nov.  8,  1848,  at  Naunton,  Beachamp, 
Worcestershire,  England,  the  son  of 
William  Griffin  and  Mary  Pitts.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  of  age 
and  came  to  Utah  in  1864.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  5,  1893,  and 
died  June  25,   1936. 

HATCH,  Robert  Oral,  Bishop  of  the 
Cornish  Ward,  Benson  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1922  to  1926,  was  born  March  15, 
1891,  in  Franklin,  Oneida  Co.,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  Hyrum  Hatch  and  Esther 
Gregory.  He  was  baptized  March  15, 
1899,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  29,  1922,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards. 

HYER,  Andrew  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Lewiston  1st  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1926,  was  born 
Aug.  9,  1882,  in  Lewiston,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Andrew  Lars  Hyer  and  Ellen 
Gilbert.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  9, 
1890,  ordained  a  Seventy  June  19, 
1904,  filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in 
1906-1909,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  2,  1920,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  23, 
1921. 

HYER,  Saul  Edward,  Bishop  of  the 
Lewiston  1st  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  4,  1892,  in  Lewiston,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Andrew  Lars  Hyer  and  Ellen 
Gilbert.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  4, 1900, 
ordained  an  Elder  May  10,  1914,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
1915-1918,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  18,  1926,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

JONES,  Ralph  Carr,  Bishop  of  the 
Newton  Ward,  Benson  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct. 
25,  1901,  at  Newton,  the  son  of  George 
Leopold  Jones  and  Mary  Wright.  He 
was  baptized  July  2,  1910,  ordained  an 
Elder  Aug,  19,  1923,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1923-1925,  and  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


413 


ordained    a    High   Priest   and    Bishop 
April  15,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

KARREN,  Thomas  Sylvester,  Bish- 
op of  the  Lewiston  3rd  Ward,  Benson 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1909  to  1928,  was 
born  Aug.  12, 1870,  at  Richmond,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Hyrum  Karren  and  Martha 
Langley.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  23, 
1879,  ordained  a  Seventy  March  cO, 
1892,  by  Chr.  D.  Fjeldsted,  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1898 
and  filled  another  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1900-1901.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  14,  1901,  by 
Alma  Merrill,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
April  17,  1909,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

KINGSFORD,  George  Elmer,  Bishop 
of  the  Smithfield  2nd  Ward,  Benson 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1928,  was 
born  Jan.  10,  1894,  at  Coveville,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  George  A.  Kings- 
ford  and  Isabel  Clements.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  10,  1902,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  22,  1921,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  a  Bishop  April  18, 
1926,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

LOOSLE,  Reuben  Oddo,  Bishop  of 
Clarkston  Ward,  Benson  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  20, 
1895,  in  Clarkston,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Wm.  Loosle  and  Elizabeth  But- 
tars.  He  was  baptized  April  21,  1903, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Oct.  12,  1924,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

LOW,  Sylvester,  Bishop  of  the 
Smithfield  2nd  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  22, 1862,  in  Providence,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Sylvester  Low  and 
Ann  A.  Patten.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
17,  1871,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  18, 
1898,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1898- 
1900,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
29,  1926,  and  a  Bishop  April  15,  1928, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 


McCARREY,  James  Lewis,  Bishop 
of  the  Richmond  South  Ward,  Benson 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  May  3,  1872,  in  Richmond,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Wm.  McCarrey  and  Melissa 
Hoops.  He  was  baptized  July  4,  1880, 
ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  11,  1896,  by 
William  Danielsen,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States  in  1896-1899,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  13,  1908, 
by  Alma  Merrill,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Jan.  22, 1917,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

MILES,  Edwin  Ruthven,  jun..  Bish- 
op of  the  Smithfield  1st  Ward,  Benson 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1906  to  1914,  was 
born  Oct.  3,  1858,  in  Big  Cottonwood, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Edwin  R.  Miles  and 
Jane  Wickfield.  He  was  baptized  Dec. 
29,  1869,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  11,  1906,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney.  He  died  Oct.  31, 
1914. 

MORTENSEN,       Jesse       Leonidas, 

Bishop  of  the  Amalga  Ward,  Benson 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1918  to  1925,  was 
born  April  21,  1873,  in  Parowan,  Iron 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Hans  J.  Morten- 
sen  and  Emily  Donetta  Alexandria. 
He  was  baptized  June  2,  1881,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  21,  1918,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

NAEGLE,  Manuel  Conrad,  Bishop 
of  the  Cornish  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1928,  was  born 
Aug.  12,  1890,  in  Pacheco,  Chihuahua, 
Mexico,  the  son  of  John  C.  Naegle  and 
Rosalia  A.  Zahler.  He  was  baptized 
by  Reuben  J.  Naegle  Aug.  12,  1898,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  12,  1914,  by 
Wm.  Waddoups  and  a  Bishop  Sept  5, 
1926,  by  Geo.   F.  Richards. 

NELSON,  George  Glen,  Bishop  of 
the  Smithfield  1st  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  7,  1896,  in  Smithfield,  the  son  of 
George  A.  Nelson  and  Lydia  G.  Lowe. 
He  was  baptized  June  4,  1906,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  J.  Golden  Kimball 


414 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Jan.  22,  1922,  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1922-1924,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  10,  1924,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun.,  and  chosen  as  Bishop 
Sept.  29,  1929. 

NELSON,  Parley  Nebo,  Bishop  of 
the  Richmond  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1921,  was  born  Feb. 
22,  1874,  in  Richmond,  the  son  of 
Christian  Nielsen  and  Mary  Israelson. 
He  was  baptized  March  2,  1882,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Jan.  22,  1917,  by 
James  E.  Talmage.  He  died  June  10, 
1922. 

NOBLE,  George  Smith,  Bishop  of 
the  Amalga  Ward,  Benson  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
1,  1893,  at  Smithfield,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  A.  Noble  and  Mary  Jane 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  31,  1901, 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Western  States  in  1919- 
1921,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
29,  1922,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a 
Bishop  Jan.  10,  1925,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

PETERSON,  John  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Smithfield  2nd  Ward,  Benson 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1926,  was 
born  Jan.  4,  1875,  in  Newton,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  A.  Peterson 
and  Marie  Hansen.  He  was  baptized 
April  5,  1883,  ordained  a  Seventy  by 
Geo.  Reynolds  April  14,  1896,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Indian  Territory  in 
1896-1898.  He  also  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Netherlands  in  1901-1904,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  22,  1922, 
by  John  A.  Widtsoe,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.  14,  1923,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

PLOWMAN,  Christian  Johan,  Bish- 
op of  the  Smithfield  1st  Ward,  Ben- 
son Stake,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1929, 
was  born  Oct.  4,  1862,  in  Bedsted, 
Thisted  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Jor- 
gen  J.  Plowman  and  Mette  Marie 
Lauritsen.      He    emigrated    with    his 


parents  to  Utah  in  1866,  and  located 
in  Mantua;  later  he  moved  to  Smith- 
field  (1870).  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia  in  1887-1889,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Oct.  26,  1917,  by  Rud- 
ger  Clawson. 

RIGBY,  William  Frederick,  Bishop 

of  the  Newton  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1884,  was  born 
Jan.  29,  1833,  at  Saddleworth,  York- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  Joseph  Rig- 
by  and  Margaret  Littleworth.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1857,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1887-1889,  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  in  the  fall  of  1867 
and  placed  in  charge  of  the  Clarkston 
Ward.  He  presided  in  Clarkston  three 
years,  moved  to  Newton  and  became 
Bishop  of  that  Ward.  He  died  March 
13,  1901. 

ROBSON,  John  Elmer,  Bishop  of 
the  Trenton  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1922  to  1930,  was  born 
Sept.  6,  1884,  in  Plain  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  James  P.  Robson  and  Eliza  Jane 
Skeen.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  6,  1892, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  2,  1918, 
by  Alma  Merrill,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op June  18,  1922,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

ROMNEY,  Park,  Bishop  of  the  Cor- 
nish Ward,  Benson  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1918  to  1922,  was  born  March  25, 
1883,  at  St.  Johns,  Arizona,  the  son  of 
Miles  P.  Romney  and  Catherine  Jane 
Cottam.  He  was  baptized  by  Gaskell 
Romney,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Jan.  20,  1918,  by  Hyrum 
G.  Smith. 

ROSKELLEY,  Richard,  Bishop  of 
the  Smithfield  3rd  Ward,  Benson 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  May  4,  1880,  in  Smithfield,  the 
son  of  Samuel  Roskelley  and  Mary 
Roberts.  He  was  baptized  May  22, 
1888,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1901-1903,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  April  18,  1926,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


416 


SMITH,  George  Y.,  jun.,  Bishop  of 
Smithfield  1st  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1915  to  1917,  was  born 
April  8,  1869,  the  son  of  George  Y. 
Smith  and  Johanna  Luckie.  He  was 
baptized  July  5,  1887,  ordained  an  El- 
der Feb.  29,  1892,  set  apart  for  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  April  8,  1892, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  25, 
1915,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.  He  died 
in  Logan  July  29,  1936. 

SMITH,  Simon  Long,  Bis|?op  of 
Clarkston  Ward,  Benson  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1870  to  1876,  was  born  in  1833 
in  England,  near  London,  was  bap- 
tized in  England  and  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1858.  He  was  chosen  a  Bish- 
op July  10,  1870,  but  later  left  the 
Church  and  joined  the  Re-organites. 
He  died  in  St.  Joseph,  Missouri,  April 
29,  1898. 

SPACKMAN,  Hazen  Merlin,  Bishop 
of  the  Lewiston  2nd  Ward,  Benson 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930  + ,  was 
born  June  30,  1896,  in  Lewiston,  the 
son  of  Henry  Spackman  and  Sarah 
Ann  Rawlings.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
2,  1905,  ordained  an  Elder  May  27, 
1917,  by  Wm.  Waddoups,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  California  in  1923-1925,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  15,  1928, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  March  14,  1929,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

TOOLSON,  Lorenzo,  Bishop  of  the 
Smithfield  2nd  Ward,  Benson  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1923,  was  born 
Aug.  18,  1863,  in  Smithfield,  the  son 
of  Lars  Toolson  and  Ingrid  Tuveson. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  4,  1872,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July 
20,  1919,  by  James  E.  Talmage.  He 
died  June  24, 1923,  in  Smithfield,  Utah. 


Big  Horn  Stake 

ANDERSON,  Charles  Gustave,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Penrose  Branch, 
Big  Horn  Stake,  Wyoming,  from  1928 


to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June  1,  1877,  in 
Richfield,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Gustave  Anderson  and  Mary  Lar- 
son. He  was  baptized  June  1,  1886, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  19,  1898,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1898-1901,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  29, 
1912. 

BRINGHURST,     George     Roberts, 

Bishop  of  the  Lovell  West  Ward,  Big 
Horn  Stake,  Wyoming,  from  1917  to 
1918,  was  born  March  3,  1876,  in  To- 
querville,  Washington  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Wm.  A.  Bringhurst  and  Selinda 
Palmer.  He  was  baptized  May  16, 1884, 
ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  5,  1899,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1899-1902.  He  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op May  27,  1917,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

CARLTON,  Hiram  Cash,  Bishop  of 
the  Lovell  West  Ward,  Big  Horn 
Stake,  Wyoming,  from  1918  to  1930 -f-, 
was  born  Sept.  25,  1879,  in  Howe's 
Valley,  Hardin  Co.,  Kentucky,  the  son 
of  John  Scott  Carlton  and  Sonora 
Cash.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his 
parents  in  March,  1890,  and  located 
in  Bountiful,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  where 
he  was  baptized  Aug.  24,  1890.  He 
moved  to  the  Big  Horn  country  in 
1900,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1906-1908,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  28,  1909,  and  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  18,  1918,  by  Richard  R.  Ly- 
man. 

CROFT,  Edward  Woolley,  president 
of  the  Big  Horn  Stake,  Wyoming, 
from  1916  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec. 
1,  1872,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Croft  and  Elizabeth  Richard- 
son. He  was  baptized  in  August,  1881, 
and  about  that  time  moved  to  Paris, 
Idaho,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov. 
29,  1896,  by  John  W.  Taylor  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  from 
Dec.  2,  1896  to  March  20,  1899,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith  Nov.  27,  1910,  and  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  Big  Horn  Stake 
Aug.  27,  1916,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 


416 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


GRAHAM,  Archie  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Byron  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake,  Wyo- 
ming, from  1928  to  1930,  was  born 
March  26,  1887,  in  Bennington,  Bear 
Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of  William 
B.  Graham  and  Margaret  Hope  Wil- 
liams. He  was  baptized  June  6,  1895, 
filled  a  short-term  mission  to  the 
Northern  States,  moved  to  the  Big 
Horn  country  in  1900,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  17, 
1928,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

HINCKLEY,  John  Heiner,  Bishop 
of  the  Cowley  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1910  to  1923,  was 
born  March  15,  1870,  in  Coalville, 
Summit  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Arza  E. 
Hinckley  and  Mary  Heiner.  He  was 
baptized  in  1879,  by  Wm.  Prouse,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  26,  1901, 
by  Abraham  O.  Woodruff,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1895- 
1898,  and  another  mission  to  the  Cen- 
tral States  in  1928-1929.  He  moved 
to  the  Big  Horn  country  in  1900,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  28,  1910, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

JOHNSON,  Seth  Alvin,  Bishop  of 
the  Penrose  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1911  to  1915,  was 
born  Nov.  9,  1864,  at  Virgin,  Wash- 
ington Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Seth 
Johnson  and  Lydia  A.  White.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  5,  1873,  by  his  father, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  27,  1910, 
by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Dec.  3,  1911. 

JOLLEY,  Haskell  Shurtliff,  Bishop 
of  the  Lovell  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1901  to  1910,  was 
born  May  17,  1861,  in  Salem,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Henry  B.  M.  Jolley  and 
Cynthia  Ann  Shurtliff.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  17,  1869,  by  his  father, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1887-1889,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  1,  1892,  by  Anthon  H. 
Lund,  moved  to  Big  Horn  in  1900,  and 
there  became  Bishop  of  the  Lovell 
Ward. 


JONES,  Charles  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Byron  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake,  Wyo- 
ming, from  1924  to  1928,  was  born 
Sept.  19,  1879,  at  Beaver,  Iroquois  Co., 
Illinois,  the  son  of  Seth  W.  Jones  and 
Saville  Lyman.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
2,  1888,  by  Geo.  W.  Irvin,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug.  17,  1919,  by  James 
E.  Talmage,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  in 
1924. 

KOHLER,  Fred,  Bishop  of  the  By- 
ron Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake,  Wyoming, 
from  1901  to  1913,  was  born  Nov.  29, 
1887,  in  Switzerland,  the  son  of  Chris- 
tian Reinhai't  Kohler  and  Rosina 
Lechty.  After  emigrating  to  Amer- 
ica, he  was  baptized  Nov.  29,  1887,  in 
the  Endowment  House,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov. 
11,  1890,  by  John  Morgan,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Switzerland  and  Germany  in 
1890-1893,  went  to  Big  Horn  in  1900, 
was  oi'dained  a  High  Priest  May  6, 
1900,  by  Abraham  O.  Woodruff,  and 
a  Bishop  May  26,  1901,  by  the  same 
Apostle. 

LINDSAY,  John  Dunn,  Bishop  of 
the  Byron  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1919  to  1924,  was  born 
Feb.  18,  1885,  in  Bennington,  Bear 
Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of  David 
Lindsay  and  Charlotte  A.  Dunn.  He 
was  baptized  June  1,  1893,  and  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  18, 
1919,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

MARCHANT,  Ernest  Wright,  Bish- 
op of  the  Cowley  Ward,  Big  Horn 
Stake,  Wyoming,  from  1923  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Aug.  25,  1884,  in  Peoa,  Sum- 
mit Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Gilbert  John- 
son Marchant  and  Elizabeth  Wright. 
He  was  baptized  in  1892  by  his  father, 
moved  to  Big  Horn  in  1900,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1907-1908,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  27,  1916,  by  David  O.  McKay, 
and  a  Bishop  May  20,  1923,  by  Hyrum 
G.  Smith. 

MAY,  Richard  C,  first  counselor  in 
the  Big  Horn  Stake  presidency,  from 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


417 


1916  to  1920,  was  born  June  27,  1876, 
in  Calls  Fort,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  James  May  and  Martha  Allen. 
He  was  baptized  April  6,  1889,  and 
was  set  apart  as  first  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  the  Big  Horn  Stake  Aug. 
27,  1916,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

McNIVEN,  James  Scott,  Bishop  of 
the  Burlington  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1901  to  1919,  was 
born  June  21,  1848,  in  Arel,  Pertshire, 
Scotland,  the  son  of  John  McNiven 
and  Janet  McNiven.  He  was  baptized 
in  1859  by  Robert  Hogg,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  26, 
1901,  by  Abraham  O.  Woodruff. 

OLSON,  Albert,  second  counselor  in 
the  Big  Horn  Stake  presider  ■,  Wyo- 
ming, from  1920  to  1930,  was  born 
Aug.  2,  1874,  near  Minneapolis,  Min- 
nesota, the  son  of  Olof  Olson  and  Kar- 
en Borg.  He  moved  with  his  parents 
to  Utah  in  1876,  and  located  in  Nephi, 
moved  to  Big  Horn  in  1901,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  12,  1917, 
by  Richard  C.  May,  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Big  Horn 
Stake  presidency  Feb.  20, 1921,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards. 

PACKARD,  William  H..  Bishop  of 
the  Burlington  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1900  to  1901,  was  born 
Aug.  12,  1851,  in  Springville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Orson  Packard  and  Matilda 
Stowell.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  14, 
1860,  by  Francis  A.  Brown,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  24,  1899,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  July  30,  1899,  by 
Apostle  Abraham  O.  Woodruff.  He 
died  Oct.  29,  1917. 

PARTRIDGE,   William   Clayton, 

Bishop  of  the  Cowley  Ward,  Big  Horn 
Stake,  Wyoming,  from  1901  to  1910, 
and  president  of  the  Big  Horn  Stake 
from  1910  to  1916,  was  born  Oct.  2, 
1862,  in  Farmington,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Edward  Partridge  and  Sar- 
ah Lucretia  Clayton.  He  was  baptized 
in  June,  1871,  by  Ralph  Rowley,  moved 


to  Fillmore  in  1864,  filled  a  mission  to 
Hawaii  in  1882-1885,  moved  to  Big 
Horn  in  1900,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  14,  1900,  by  Jedediah  M. 
Grant,  and  a  Bishop  July  19,  1901,  by 
Abraham  O.  Woodruff. 

PORTER,  George  Myron,  Bishop  of  V 
the  Otto  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake,  Wyo- 
ming, from  1901  to  1906,  was  bom 
March  17,  1871,  at  Porterville,  Morgan 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Alma  Porter  and 
Minerva  Deuel.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1899-1901, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  10, 
1901,  by  Marriner  W.  Merrill. 

PORTER,  Orson  Merit,  Bishop  of 
the  Otto  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake,  Wyo- 
ming, from  1917  to  1930 -|-,  was  bom 
July  26,  1869,  in  Porterville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Alma  Porter  and  Minerva  Deu- 
el. He  was  baptized  July  26,  1877,  by 
his  father,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1890-1892,  moved 
to  Big  Horn  in  1901,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Aug.  25,  1917,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

ROBERTSON,  Cyrus  Snell,  Bishop 
of  the  Lovell  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1917  to  1930 -f,  was 
bom  Oct.  21,  1880,  in  Spanish  Fork, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  W.  Robertson 
and  Lucy  H.  Snell.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  1,  1889,  moved  to  the  Big  Horn 
Basin  in  1901,  was  ordained  an  Elder 
in  1902,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1902-1905,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  27, 
1917,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

THOMAS,  Emanuel,  Bishop  of  the 
Byron  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake,  Wyo- 
ming, from  1913  to  1919,  was  born 
Nov.  25,  1866,  at  Provo,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Emanuel  Thomas  and  Mary 
Ellis.  He  was  baptized  by  Philip 
Thomas,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb. 
23,  1913,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

WASDEN,  James  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Penrose  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake,  Wyo- 


Vol.  IV.  No.  27 


July  4,  1936 


418 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ming,  from  1915  to  1928,  was  born 
July  16,  1870,  in  Scipio,  Millard  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  James  B.  Wasden 
and  Anna  Sophie  Jensen.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Isaac  Pierce,  moved  to  Big 
Horn,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1898-1900,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  30,  1910,  by  Jesse 
W.  Crosby,  jun.,  and  a  Bishop  April 
11,  1915. 

WINTERS,  Niels  Erastus,  Bishop 
of  the  Otto  Ward,  Big  Horn  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1909  to  1917  (presid- 
ing Elder  from  1906  to  1909),  was 
born  March  20,  1874,  in  Montpelier, 
Bear  Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
Frantz  Martin  Winters  and  Johanna 
Kristine  Larsen.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  10,  1882,  moved  to  Big  Horn  in 
1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  28,  1909,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman. 

TIPPETS,  Brigham  Lewis,  jun.,  first 
counselor  in  the  Big  Horn  Stake  pres- 
idency, Wyoming,  from  1920  t  o 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  1,  1880,  in 
Brigham  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Brig- 
ham  L.  and  Eliza  Tippets.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  29,  1888,  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Seymour  B.  Young  Nov. 
18,  1902,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1902-1904,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Feb.  21,  1914, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  served  as  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Big  Horn  Stake 
presidency  from  1916  to  1920,  and  as 
first  counselor  from  Feb.  20,  1921,  be- 
ing set  apart  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 


BILLS,  William  Ervine,  Bishop  of 

the  Blackfoot  1st  Ward,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930 -f, 
was  born  Dec.  19,  1884,  in  Riverton, 
Utah,  the  son  of  William  Andrew 
Bills,  jun.,  and  Henrietta  M.  Hill.  He 
was  baptized  in  January,  1893,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
1920,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bi.shop  May  18,  1924,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 

BLACKBURN,  Thomas,  president 
of  the  Springfield  Branch,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1930  +  ,  was 
born  July  18,  1858,  in  Provo,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Elias  H.  Blackburn  and 
Sarah  J.  Goff .  He  moved  to  Loa,  Utah, 
in  1876,  and  acted  as  a  counselor  in 
the  bishopric  of  that  ward,  filled  a 
mission  in  the  Eastern  States  in  1896- 
1897,  acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Loa  Ward 
from  1898  to  1900,  moved  to  Blackfoot 
and  in  1913  to  Springfield,  Idaho, 
where  he  was  set  apart  as  pi-esiding 
Elder  Oct.  24,  1920. 

BUCHANAN,  Ezra  Sylvester,  Bish- 
op of  the  Wapello  Ward,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1916,  was 
born  at  Centerville,  West  Virginia, 
Oct.  10,  1871,  the  son  of  Renix  R.  Bu- 
chanan and  Mary  A.  Clendenen.  He 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  and 
was  baptized  by  John  Y.  Barlow  Dec. 
17,  1895,  in  West  Virginia.  After  his 
an-ival  in  Utah  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Samuel  Hammond,  and 
later  a  Bishop  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 
Bro.  Buchanan  served  as  Bishop  of 
the  Pingree  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from   1918  to   1930. 


Blackfoot  Stake 

BERG.  Hosea.  Bishop  of  the  Tilden 
Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1907  to  1910,  was  born  July  4,  1873, 
in  Christiania,  Norway,  the  son  of 
Halvor  H.  Berg  and  Caroline  Larsen. 
He  was  baptized  in  1883  by  Thomas 
Farrer,  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  May, 
1899,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  6,  1910. 


BUCHANAN,  Osmond,  Bishop  of 
the  Blackfoot  1st  Ward,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1917,  was 
born  Sept.  25,  1871,  in  Glenwood,  Se- 
vier Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Archibald 
Buchanan  and  Maria  Larson.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  1,  1880,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1899-1901, 
settled  in  Blackfoot  in  1901,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Feb.  8,  1902,  by 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


419 


H.  P.  Smith,  and  a  Bishop  May  7,  1915, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

CALL,  Elbert  Vanson,  Bishop  of  the 
Wapello  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1916  to  1920,  was  born  Aug. 
3,  1881,  in  Bountiful,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Chester  V.  Call  and  Annie 
J.  Barlow.  He  was  baptized  by  Tru- 
man H.  Barlow,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  14,  1915,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

CHRISTIANSEN.  Hans  Peter,  Bish- 
op of  the  Moreland  Ward,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1896  to  1898,  was 
born  April  26,  1861,  in  Denmark,  the 
son  of  Peter  Christiansen  and  Ann  Pe- 
tersen. He  was  baptized  July  1,  1869, 
by  John  J.  Wilson,  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia  Oct.  19,  1900, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Wm. 
F.  Rigby,  and  a  Bishop  March  23,  1896, 
by  John  Henry  Smith. 

CLINGER,  Marion,  Bishop  of  the 
Aberdeen  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1918  to  1925,  was  born  June 
13,  1874,  in  Provo,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  H.  Clinger  and  Pauline  M.  Wil- 
liamson. He  was  baptized  in  1886,  by 
Bishop  John  Johnson,  ordained  an  El- 
der Feb.  7,  1895,  by  L.  L.  Bunnell, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1895-1897,  was  oi'dained  a  High 
Priest  May  21,  1905,  by  David  John, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  3,  1918. 

COBBLEY,  James  David  O.,  Bishop 
of  the  Riverside  Ward,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1912  to  1915,  was 
born  July  14,  1874,  in  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah,  the  son  of  James  Cobbley  and 
Emma  Thorne.  He  was  baptized  July 
2,  1882,  set  apart  for  a  mission  to 
California  March  17,  1897,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  18,  1912,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

COOPER,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Ster- 
ling Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake,  Idaho,  in 
1930 +  ,  was  born  May  5,  1886,  in 
Bountiful,   Utah,  the  son  of  William 


Cooper  and  Sarah  Ann  Morgan.  He 
was  baptized  June  1,  1906,  filled  a 
short  term  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1927-1928,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  28,  1920,  by  No- 
fear  Davis,  and  a  Bishop  May  25,  1930, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

DANCE,  Philip  Bingham,  Bishop  of 
the  Thomas  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
May  28,  1882,  in  West  Weber,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Philip  Dance  and  Rosetta 
Bingham.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  2, 
1890,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  June  19, 
1927,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

ENGLAND,  William  T.,  Bishop  of 
the  Moreland  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1907  to  1927,  was  born 
Jan.  25,  1874,  in  Plain  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  James  England  and  Laura 
Thuesen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  28, 
1882,  by  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff",  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan. 
11,  1908,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

GARDNER,  Joseph  Samuel,  Bishop 
of  the  Rose  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1928,  was  born 
March  5,  1885,  in  Salem,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Jos.  Edwai-d  Gardner  and  Ellen 
L.  Snow.  He  was  baptized  June  6, 
1895,  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  10,  1905, 
by  David  R.  Taylor,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Central  States  in  1907-1908, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  16,  1915,  by  George  Al- 
bert Smith. 

HALVERSON,     Francis    Theodore, 

Bishop  of  the  Riverside  Ward,  Black- 
foot Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930  +  , 
was  born  April  5,  1875,  in  Marriott, 
Weber  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Simon  F. 
Halverson  and  Ingeborg  Fredricksen. 
He  was  baptized  in  May,  1884,  by 
Henry  Tracy,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
May  18,  1924,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

HEESE.  Frank  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Blackfoot  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from   1903  to   1904,  was  born 


420 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


May  21,  1865,  at  Apenrade,  Schlesvig- 
Holstein,  Germany.  He  was  baptized 
in  July,  1899,  was  appointed  presiding 
Elder  in  1902,  and  acted  until  Feb- 
ruary, 1903,  when  he  was  chosen  as 
Bishop. 

JACKMAN,  Walter  Brady.  Bishop 
of  the  Rose  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
April  20,  1878,  in  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Sylvester  Martin  Jackman  and 
Martha  Catherine  Gardner.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  4,  1892,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  15,  1928, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

JEPPSON,  Royal  M.,  Bishop  of  the 
Blackfoot  1st  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1920  to  1924,  was  born 
Oct.  27,  1885,  in  Millville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Jeppson  and  Annie  L. 
Cederholm.  He  was  baptized  May  2, 
1893,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  18, 
1917,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith,  and  a  Bish- 
op Dec.  19,  1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

JOHNSTON,  Peter  Green,  Bishop  of 
the  Blackfoot  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1904-1905,  was  born  Aug. 
15,  1864,  in  Gramsay,  Orkney,  Scot- 
land, the  son  of  Wm.  Johnston  and 
Isabella  Green.  He  was  baptized  June 
23,  1878,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  23,  1904,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  died  Jan.  7, 
1931,   at  Blackfoot. 

JOHNSTON,  Peter  Rich,  1st  Coun- 
selor in  the  Blackfoot  Stake  Pi-esi- 
dency,  Idaho,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  7,  1897,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Peter  G.  Johnston  and  Alice 
Duckworth.  He  was  baptized  July  9, 
1905,  moved  to  Blackfoot  in  1903,  was 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1915,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Australia  in  1915-1919,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Piiest  Feb.  23, 
1930,  and  set  apart  by  Richard  R.  Ly- 
man. 

LINDSAY.  Warren  Parks,  presid- 
ing Elder  from  1898  to  1899  and  Bish- 


op of  the  Moi-eland  Ward,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1899  to  1907,  was 
born  July  22,  1862,  in  Kaysville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  William  B.  Lindsay  and 
Julia  Parks.  He  moved  with  his  par- 
ents to  Bear  Lake  Valley,  Idaho,  was 
baptized  in  1871  and  moved  to  More- 
land  in  1896.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  5,  1898,  by  James  E. 
Keetch,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
24,  1899,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

LUCHERINE,  Henry,  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Rich  Branch,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1902  to  1906  was 
born  Nov.  24,  1863,  in  Italy.  He  emi- 
grated to  America  when  16  years  old, 
and  arrived  in  Utah  when  he  was 
about  29  years  old.  He  was  baptized 
Jan.  5,  1892,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  11,  1902,  and  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  Rich  Branch  by 
George  Teasdale. 

MERKLEY,  Ray  Edgar,  Bi.shop  of 
the  Wapello  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1920  to  1926,  was  born 
May  8,  1889,  at  St.  Charles,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Christopher  A.  Merkley  and 
Lydia  L.  Alh*ed.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
6,  1898,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  14,  1915,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  a  Bishop  May  15,  1920,  by  Mel- 
vin J.  Ballard. 

MERKLEY,     Christopher     Amos, 

Bishop  of  the  Wapello  Ward,  Black- 
foot Stake,  Idaho,  from  1910  to  1915, 
was  born  Feb.  28,  1859,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Christopher 
Merkley  and  Theressa  Fairbanks.  He 
was  baptized  in  August,  1868,  by  his 
father,  and  oi-dained  a  Bishop  Aug.  14, 
1910.     He  died  Aug.  4,  1935. 

MONSON,  John  F..  Bishop  of  the 
Aberdeen  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1925  to  1929.  was  born  Oct. 
4,  1873,  in  Mt.  Plea.sant,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Peter  Monsen  and  Hannah  C. 
Christensen.  He  was  baptized  June 
18,  1882,  was  ordaned  a  High  Priest 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


421 


Dec.  3,  1916,  by  Nofear  Davis,  and  a 
Bishop  May  9,  1925,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

NILSSON  (Nelson).  Oscar  Edwin, 
Bishop  of  the  Sterling  Ward,  Black- 
foot  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1912  to  1913, 
was  born  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
Jan.  28,  1871,  the  son  of  Olaus  F. 
Nilsson  and  Anna  Erickson.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  4,  1904,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  14,  1907,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  oi-dained  a  Bishop  Feb. 
6,  1910,  to  preside  over  the  Tilden 
Ward,  which  in  1912  became  the  Ster- 
ling Ward. 

PARKINSON,    Franklin    Chandler, 

Bishop  of  the  Blackfoot  1st  Ward, 
Blackfoot  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1909  to 
1915,  was  boi-n  July  7,  1859,  at  Kays- 
ville,  Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel  R.  Par- 
kinson and  Arabella  Ann  Chandler. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  24,  1869,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  9,  1909, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant.  Bro.  Parkinson  had 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Blackfoot  Ward 
before  1909,  as  he  was  set  apart  Jan. 

14,  1906,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

PEHRSON,  Nels  A.,  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Aberdeen  Branch,  Black- 
foot Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  19 IG, 
was  born  Oct.  26,  1865,  in  Denmark, 
the  son  of  Andreas  Pehrson  and  Han- 
nah Swenson.   He  was  baptized  March 

15,  1891,  and  w^as  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  presiding  Elder  Oct.  3, 
1915,  by  James  Duckworth. 

PORTER,  Royal  Ernest,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Rich  Branch,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1927  and  in 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  25,  1887,  in 
Porterville,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  P. 
Porter  and  Amy  Z.  Porter.  He  was 
baptized  June  28,  1896,  was  set  apart 
as  presiding  Elder  Oct.  1,  1922,  by 
Px'es.  James  Duckworth,  and  again 
set  apart  on  May  25,  1930,  to  the  same 
position  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

PUGMIRE,  George  Young,  Bishop 
of  the  Tilden  Ward.  Blackfoot  Stake. 


Idaho,  from  1896  to  1907,  was  born 
Sept.  20,  1866,  in  St.  Charles,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  George  M.  Pugmire  and 
Marie  Young.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  moved  to  Tilden  in 
1895,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  14,  1896,  by  John 
Henry  Smith. 

RIDER,  Oscar  L.,  Bishop  of  the 
Blackfoot  2nd  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1917  to  1924,  was  born 
Jan.  28,  1883,  in  Kanab,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  Rider  and  Mary  McDonald. 
He  was  baptized  in  1891  by  Asa  W. 
Judd,  ordained  an  Elder  April  20,  1901, 
by  his  father,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  in  1901-1903,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  20,  1917,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

ROBERTSON,  Joseph  Leon,  presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Riverton  Branch, 
Blackfoot  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924  to 
1930  4- ,  was  born  June  5,  1890,  at  Lake 
Shore,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ezra  W.  Rob- 
ertson and  Rebecca  Ann  Finch.  He 
was  baptized  June  5,  1898,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  New  Zealand  in  1914-1917. 
He  was  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder 
of  Riverton  Branch  Nov.  16,  1924,  by 
Rudger   Clawson. 

ROGERSON,  Daniel  Edwin,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Fort  Hall  Branch, 
Blackfoot  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924  to 
1930  + ,  was  born  March  25,  1880,  in 
Heber  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Daniel 
Rogerson  and  Lydia  Holmes  Fuller. 
He  was  baptized  May  2,  1889,  ordained 
an  Elder  April  19,  1902,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1902-1904, 
moved  to  Fort  Hall,  in  1917,  and  on 
June  21,  1924,  he  was  set  apart  as  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Fort  Hall  Branch 
by  James  Duckworth. 

SMITH,  George  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Riverside  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1919,  was  born 
April  23,  1860,  at  Lehi,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Samuel  T.  Smith  and  Jane  Dean. 


422 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


He  was  baptized  July  11,  1869,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  14,  1915, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

SNYDER,  William  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Blackfoot  2nd  Ward,  Blackfoot 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930,  was 
born  Nov.  22,  1871,  in  Fairfield,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Henry  Snyder  and  Sophia 
Hardy.  He  was  baptized  in  1880  by 
James  Finn,  ordained  an  Elder  in  1897 
by  Bishop  Eli  Bennett  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion in  the  Swiss-German  Mission  in 
1904-1907.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  27,  1917,  by  James  Duck- 
worth and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  IG, 
1924,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

STONE,  David  Augustin,  Bishop  of 
the  Aberdeen  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
May  18,  1875,  in  Salina,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Calvin  Augustin  Stone  and 
Eliza  Emeline  Taylor.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  2,  1883,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  18,  1919,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun.,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  29, 
1929,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

THOMAS,  Lorenzo  K.,  Bishop  of  the 
Blackfoot  2nd  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1909  to  1917,  was  born 
May  31,  1870,  in  Haverley,  Stafford- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  James 
Thomas  and  Elizabeth  Richardson.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  9,  1909,  by 
Hebor  J.  Grant. 

WATSON,  Edwin.  Bishop  of  the 
Blackfoot  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1896  to  1902,  was  born  Dec. 
15,  1848,  in  Burton-on-Trent,  Stafford- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  Joseph  S. 
Watson  and  Ann  Barratt.  He  was 
baptized  in  March,  1857,  by  Jos.  Daw- 
son, emigrated  to  Utah  in  1873,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  23,  1896,  by  John  Henry  Smith, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1898-1900. 

WILLIAMS,     Joseph     Elmer,     2nd 

counselor    in    the    presidency    of    the 


Blackfoot  Stake  in  1930  +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  11,  1892,  in  Beaver,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Joseph  Williams  and  Frida  C.  An- 
derson. He  was  baptized  in  1900  by 
James  Gerrard,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  in  1912-1914,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  27,  1916, 
by  James  Duckworth,  and  was  set 
apart  as  2nd  counselor  in  the  Blackfoot 
Stake  presidency  by  Rudger  Clawson 
May  25,  1930. 

WILLIAMS,  Peter  Joan,  Bishop  of 
the  Wapello  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  25,  1873,  in  Goshen,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Geo.  Williams  and  Emma  J. 
Stevenson.  He  was  baptized  in  1881 
by  Peter  Okelberry,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1897- 
1898.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  20,  1898,  by  George 
Teasdale,  and  pi-esided  over  the  Hatch 
Ward.  He  was  set  apart  Feb.  14,  1926, 
by  Rudger  Clawson  to  preside  over  the 
Wapello  Ward. 

WINTLE,  George  Barlow,  Bishop  of 
the  Riverside  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1896  to  1906  (presiding 
Elder  from  1889-1893),  was  born  Oct. 
6,  1865,  in  Wilson,  near  Ogden,  Weber 
County,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Wintle 
and  Mary  Wilson.  He  was  baptized 
in  May,  1875,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1894-1895,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  March  23,  1896,  by 
John  Henry  Smith. 

YANCEY,  Adam,  Bishop  of  the 
Groveland  Ward,  Blackfoot  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1903  to  1914,  was  born  April 
6,  1859,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Hyrum  Yancey  and  Harriet  Wood.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  nine  years 
old  at  Bountiful  by  Henry  Lee,  filled 
a  short  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
about  1895,  acted  as  presiding  Elder 
at  Groveland,  Idaho,  from  April  27, 
1902,  to  Feb.  1,  1903,  when  the  Grove- 
land Branch  was  organized  as  a  ward 
with  Adam  Yancey  as  Bishop.    He  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


423 


set  apart  to  act  as  Bishop  Feb,  8,  1902, 
by  John  Henry  Smith. 


Blaine  Stake 


HARRIS,  George  Summer,  Bishop 
of  the  Blaine  Ward,  Blaine  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1892  to  1909,  was  bora  Feb. 
20,  1866,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Chauncey  S.  Harris  and  Susannah 
Waring.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  1, 
1877,  was  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder 
June  5,  1892,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op March  22,  1896,  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. 


Boise  Stake 

ANDERSEN,  Wilford  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Emmett  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1902  to  1903,  was  born  Aug.  6, 
1872,  in  Hyrum,  Utah,  the  son  of  An- 
drew Andersen  and  Johanne  Ander- 
sen. He  was  baptized  Nov.  3,  1880, 
and  acted  as  presiding  Elder  of  the 
Emmett  Branch  from  May  25,  1902, 
until  Sept.  13,  1902,  when  he  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop,  the  branch  being 
organized  as  a  wai'd  on  that  date. 

BILLS,  Alexander,  Bishop  of  the 
Nampa  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1913  to  1914,  was  born  Sept.  4, 
1857,  in  Little  Cottonwood,  Utah,  the 
son  of  William  A.  Bills  and  Emme- 
line  Beckstead.  He  moved  to  Idaho 
in  1914,  and  acted  as  presiding  Elder 
over  the  Nampa  Branch  until  it  was 
organized  as  a  ward  Dec.  7,  1913, 
when  he  was  chosen  as  Bishop. 

BROWN,  Scott  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Weiser  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June 
22,  1885,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Homer  Manley  Brown  and  Ly- 
dia  Jane  Brown.  He  was  baptized 
May  1,  1893,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1908-1910.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  March  10,  1928,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 


CHRISTIANSEN,  Leonard,  presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Ontario  Branch, 
Boise  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  March  31,  1879,  in 
Deseret,  Utah,  the  son  of  Niels  John 
Christiansen  and  Ellen  Stark.  He  was 
baptized  May  6,  1887,  by  his  father, 
and  sustained  as  branch  president 
Feb.  19,  1928. 

DALTON,  Frederick  William,  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Boise  Stake  pres- 
idency, Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  5,  1896,  in  Plain  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Frederick  William 
Dalton  and  Annie  Dorothy  Benson. 
He  was  baptized  June  2,  1904,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  10,  1929, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  stake  presiden- 
cy March  10,  1929. 

EDGLEY,  William  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Boise  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1920,  was  born  April  6, 
1874,  in  London,  England,  the  son  of 
Joseph  Edgley  and  Mary  Ann  Spill- 
man.  He  was  baptized  in  1882,  by 
Ephraim  H.  Nye,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  12,  1915,  by  Jos.  B.  Hawk- 
ley,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  10,  1919,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

FUHRIMAN,  George  Washington, 
Bishop  of  the  Kuna  Ward,  Boise 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1925,  was 
born  Jan.  15,  1879,  in  Providence, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jacob  Fuhriman  and 
Mary  Loosle.  He  was  baptized  March 
5,  1887,  and  after  acting  as  presiding 
Elder  from  1918,  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  7,  1920, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

GRIGG,  Parley  M.,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Nampa  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1916  to  1924,  was  born  Dec.  13, 
1878,  at  Payson,  Utah,  the  son  of  Par- 
ley Mormon  Grigg,  sen.,  and  Amanda 
C.  Oyler.  He  was  baptized  June  2, 
1887,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States   in    1899-1901,  was   ordained   a 


424 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


High  Priest  Oct.  25,  1914,  by  Heber 
Q.  Hale,  and  a  Bishop  May  7,  1916, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

GWILLIAM,      Franklin      Stanford, 

presiding  Elder  of  the  Weiser  Branch, 
Boise  Stake  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1916, 
and  Bishop  of  the  Weiser  Ward  from 
1916  to  1925,  was  born  Nov.  26,  1888, 
at  Hooper,  Utah,  the  son  of  Benjamin 
T.  Gwilliam  and  Amelia  Stanford.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  14,  1897,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  19,  1914,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  a  Bishop  June  25,  1916. 

HARRIS,  Joseph  Emer,  Bishop  of 
the  Boise  2nd  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  5,  1887,  at  Charleston,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Dennison-  Emer  Harris  and 
Anna  Jane  Wride.  He  was  baptized 
April  11,  1895,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  4,  1923,  by  Rudger  Clawson, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  2,  1923, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HOAGLAND,  James  T.,  Bishop  of 
the  Bramwell  Ward,  Boise  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1908  to  1916  (presiding 
Elder  from  1907  to  1908)  was  born 
Jan.  25,  1876,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Edward  T.  Hoagland  and 
Sarah  E,  Lish.  He  was  baptized  in 
August,  1884,  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1898-1900,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  12, 
1908,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

HOGENSEN,  Alfred,  Bishop  of  the 
Boise  1st  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1923  to  1926,  was  born  April  28, 
1875,  in  Christiania,  Norway,  a  fos- 
tei'-son  of  Christian  Hogensen  and 
Petria  Larsen.  He  emigrated  to  Amer- 
ica in  June,  1884,  was  baptized  July 
10,  1884,  ordained  a  Seventy  April  27, 
1897,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  In- 
dian Territory  in  1897-1899.  He 
moved  to  Boise  from  Montpelier  in 
1906,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
22,  1914,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a 
Bishop  May  2,  1920.  He  acted  as  Bish- 


op of  the  Boise  Ward  from  that  date 
until  the  ward  was  divided  March  4, 
1923,  when  he  was  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Boise  1st  Ward  by  Rud- 
ger Clawson. 

JEPPSON,  Hans  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Bramwell  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1902  to  1903,  was  born  Sept. 
11,  1864,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Jeppa  Hans  Jeppson  and  Gu- 
nill  Maria  Henderson.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  August,  1874,  and  chosen 
Bishop  Sept.  14,  1902. 

JOHNSON,  Peter  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Nampa  2nd  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  bom  Jan. 
28,  1878,  at  Mineral  Point,  Wisconsin, 
the  son  of  Ole  C.  Johnson  and  Nellie 
M.  Larson.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  5, 
1886,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  5,  1901, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Middle  States 
in  1901-1904,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  by  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney, presided  over  the  Paul  Ward, 
Minidoka  Stake,  from  1915  to  1917, 
and  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Nampa 
2nd  Ward  Feb.  21,  1926. 

KLOEPFER,  Frank  Philip,  Bishop 

of  the  Boise  1st  Ward,  Boise  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930,  was  born 
Nov.  5,  1887,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Philip  Kloepfer  and  Louise  Leh- 
man. He  was  baptized  Jan.  25,  1906, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  2, 
1929,  by  John  Wells,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  March  9,  1930,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

KLOEPFER,  Henry   Philip,  Bishop 

of  the  Kuna  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1925  to  1930 -|-,  was  born  Oct. 
25,  1880,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Henry  Kloepfer  and  Eliza  Harlacher. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  1,  1888,  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  April  17,  1901,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant,  filled  a  mission  to  Germany 
in  1901-1904,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  7,  1920,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richai-ds,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec. 
5,  1925,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


425 


LEWIS,  George  Warren,  second 
counselor  in  the  Boise  Stake  presiden- 
cy, Idaho,  from  1926  to  1929,  was 
born  Sept.  28,  1874,  in  Richmond, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Neriah  R. 
Lewis  and  Amanda  J.  Allred.  He  was 
baptized  in  1882  by  his  father,  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  Oct.  22,  1893,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  filled  a  mission  to  Austra- 
lia in  1893-1896,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  22,  1914,  acted  as  Bishop 
of  Boise  Ward  from  1915  to  1919,  and 
was  set  apart  as  2nd  counselor  to 
President  Heber  Q.  Hale  Dec.  5,  1926, 
by  Charles  W.  Nibley.  He  died  Feb. 
13,  1929. 

NELSON,  David,  Bishop  of  the  Em- 
mett  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1903  to  1913,  was  bom  Oct.  2,  1855, 
in  Lehi,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jens  Nielsen 
and  Karen  Christine  Bentzen.  He  was 
baptized  at  Lehi,  in  1864,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  7,  1885,  by  Wm.  F. 
Rigby,  moved  to  Emmett  June  10, 
1902,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
10,  1904,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

NELSON,  Heber  C,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Bramwell  branch,  Boise  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1906  to  1907,  was  born 
Feb.  3,  1871,  in  Bloomington,  Bear 
Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Christian 
Nelson  and  Ann  Josephine  Evans.  He 
was  sustained  as  presiding  Elder  Dec. 
9,   1906. 

ROSE,  Elmer  Lee,  Bishop  of  the 
Bramwell  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  25, 
1872,  in  Farming-ton,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Erastus  F.  Rose  and  Josephine  El- 
nora  Robinson.  He  was  baptized  in 
1880,  filled  a  mission  in  the  Eastern 
States  in  1909-1911,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  2,  1919, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

SALISBURY,  Joseph  G.,  Bishop  of 
the  Boise  2nd  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  March,  1923,  to  October,  1923, 
was  born  Oct.  16,  1888,  at  Wellsville, 


Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  H.  Salisbury 
and  Matilda  J.  Gibbs.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Switzerland  and  Germany  in 
1910-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  4,  1923,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

SINCLAIR,  William  A.  H.,  Bishop 
of  the  Bramwell  Ward,  Boise  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1916  to  1919,  was  born 
June  20,  1880,  in  Portage,  Morgan  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  William  Sinclair  and 
Mary  Carter  Hoskins.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  25,  1888,  by  James  Halford, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  5,  1916, 
by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

SMITH,  George  F.,  Bishop  of  the 
Emmett  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1913  to  1930,  was  born  July  14, 
1875,  in  South  Cottonwood,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Geo.  Smith  and  Catherine 
Wooten.  He  was  baptized  May  4, 
1896,  filled  a  mission  in  1905-1907  to 
Great  Britain,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  26,  1905,  by  Charles  W. 
Nibl^,  and  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the 
Emmett  Ward,  April  13,  1913. 

STEPHENS,  Amos  R.,  Bishop  of 
the  Nampa  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1914-1915,  was  born  July  8,  1884, 
in  Bennington,  Bear  Lake  Co.,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  George  E.  Stephens  and 
Winnifred  Wright.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  14,  1892,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  in  1905-1907,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  18,  1914, 
by  James  E.  Talmage. 

STODDARD,  William  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Weiser  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1914  to  1915,  was  bom  Dec.  4, 
1873,  in  Birch  Creek,  Weber  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  M.  Stoddard  and 
Mary  J.  Priest.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
2,  1883,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  27,  1914,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

WARD,  Clarence  Truelock,  second 
counselor  in  the  Boise  Stake  presiden- 
cy, Idaho,  from  1919  to  1926,  and  first 


426 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


counselor  from  1926  to  1930,  was  born 
April  26,  1888,  in  Almo,  Cassia  Co., 
Idaho,  the  son  of  Charles  R.  Ward  and 
Margaret  E.  Mason.  He  was  baptized 
July  8,  1896,  ordained  an  Elder  Dec. 
15,  1909,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain in  1909-1912,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  6,  1912,  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  in  the  Boise  Stake  Dec. 
5,  1926,  by  Chas.  W.  Nibley. 

WILDE,  Albert  Alanson,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Melba  Branch,  Boise 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930  +  ,  was 
born  June  28,  1885,  in  Mink  Creek, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  Albert  A.  Wilde  and 
Tora  Keller.  He  was  baptized  June 
28,  1893,  by  Andrew  A.  Larson,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
19044-1907,  and  was  sustained  as 
branch  president  July  21,  1929. 

WORTHINGTON,    Samuel    Wilson, 

Bishop  of  the  Boise  1st  Ward,  Boise 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1926  to  1929,  was 
born  March  3,  1874,  in  Payson,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel  Worth- 
ington  and  Mary  Wilson.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  3,  1913,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Sept.  12,  1926,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

YANCEY,  William  Elvie,  Bishop  of 
the  Weiser  Ward,  Boise  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1925  to  1928,  was  born  Sept.  4, 
1872,  in  Mississippi,  the  son  of  Jasper 
Yancey  and  Sarah  Francis  Tunnell. 
He  was  baptized  April  28,  1899,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  25,  1916, 
by  C.  Oscar  Winkler,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Sept.  13,  1925,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 


Box    Elder   Stake 

BLACKBURN,  Thomas  Henry,  Bish- 
op of  the  Brigham  City  2nd  Ward,  Box 
Elder  Stake,  from  1904  to  1922,  was 
born  June  8,  1856,  in  Branstone,  Staf- 
fordshire, England,  the  son  of  Joseph 


Blackburn  and  Ann  Bark.  He  was 
baptized  June  8,  1864,  by  his  father, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  4,  1892, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Aug.  23,  1904,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

BOWRING,  John  Franklin,  Bishop 
of  the  Brigham  City  3rd  Ward,  Box 
Elder  Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  July  2,  1866,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Henry 
Ebenezer  Bowring  and  Annie  New- 
man. He  was  baptized  in  1874,  moved 
to  Brigham  City  in  1877,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Germany  in  1901-1903,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  19,  1907, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  3,  1926,  by 
John  A.  Widtsoe. 

BURT,  David  Patterson,  Bishop  of 
the  Brigham  City  3rd  Ward,  Box  El- 
der Stake,  Utah,  from  1912  to  1917, 
was  born  Sept.  11,  1852,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Davidson 
Burt  and  Elizabeth  Patterson.  He  was 
baptized  July  24,  1871,  by  his  father, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  17,  1899, 
by  Charles  Kelley,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Sept.  1,  1912,  by  Charles  W. 
Penrose.  He  died  Dec.  6,  1924,  in  Brig- 
ham City,  Utah. 

CORDON,  Alfred,  Bishop  of  the 
Willard  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1859  to  1871,  was  born  Feb.  28, 
1817,  near  Liverpool,  England,  the  son 
of  Sampson  and  Myra  Cordon.  He  was 
baptized  in  1859  by  David  Wilding,  la- 
bored as  a  local  missionary  in  England 
for  several  years,  emigrated  to  Nau- 
voo,  Illinois,  filled  a  second  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1848-1850,  and  locat- 
ed at  Willard.  In  the  fall  of  1856  he 
was  appointed  presiding  Elder  of 
North  Willow  Ci-eek  Branch  (now  Wil- 
lard), and  became  a  Bishop  of  the  Wil- 
lard Ward  in  1857. 

DAVIS,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Brigham  City  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,   from   1851    to   1855,   was   bom 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


427 


Sept.  12,  1795,  in  Union  Township, 
Westmoreland  Co.,  Pennsylvania.  He 
was  baptized  by  Simeon  Carter  in  De- 
cember, 1832,  came  to  Utah  in  1848, 
and  settled  in  Brigham  City  in  1851, 
acted  as  presiding  Elder  of  Brigham 
City  in  1851,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op, and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Box  Elder  settlement  April  30,  1852. 
He  died  Nov.  22,  1883,  in  Brigham  City. 

DREDGE,  William  Rhees,  Bishop  of 
the  Brigham  City  6th  Ward,  Box  El- 
der Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930  + , 
was  born  May  28,  1880,  in  Malad,  Ida- 
ho, the  son  of  Jesse  R.  Dredge  and 
Ellen  Rhees.  He  was  baptized  May 
28,  1888,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  22, 
1899,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States  in  1899-1901.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  23,  1921,  by 
Jos.  N.  Stohl,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
April  14,  1929,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

FACER,  George,  Bishop  of  the  Wil- 
lard  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1882  to  1892,  was  born  July  4, 
1834,  in  Eynesbury,  Huntingdonshire, 
England,  the  son  of  Henry  Facer  and 
Mary  Jarvis.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  5, 
1854,  by  James  B.  Price,  came  to  Utah 
in  1860,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  9,  1877,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Dec.  3,  1882,  by  Lorenzo  Snow. 

FACER,  William  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Willard  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1903  to  1910,  was  born 
July  13,  1861,  in  Willard,  the  son  of 
George  Facer  and  Mary  Prior.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1900-1903,  was  called  to  Willard  to  act 
as  Bishop  in  1903,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  8,  1903, 
by    Rudger   Clawson. 

FISHBURN,  James  Alfred,  Bishop 
of  the  Brigham  City  5th  Ward,  Box 
Elder  Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to 
1930 -f,  was  born  April  14,  1877,  in 
Brigham  City,  the  son  of  Robert  L. 
Fishburn  and  Laura  Matilda  Noble.  He 


was  baptized  Sept.  20,  1885,  ordained 
a  Seventy  Jan.  12,  1900,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1900-1902,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op March  18,  1921,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage. 

HANSEN,  Anthon  Marius,  Bishop 
of  the  Brigham  City  4th  Ward,  Box 
Elder  Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  6,  1871,  in 
Christiania,  Norway,  the  son  of  Hans 
Martin  Hansen  and  Bertha  Karine 
Nielsen.  He  was  baptized  in  Norway 
in  1884,  and  emigrated  with  his  mother 
the  same  year  to  Utah,  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  June  14,  1899,  by  Chr.  D. 
Fjeldsted,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1899-1901.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Rudger  Clawson 
April  4,  1925. 

HANSEN,  Jens,  Bishop  of  the  Brig- 
ham City  4th  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1885  to  1899,  was  born 
July  28,  1824,  in  Glostrup,  Holboak 
amt,  Sjelland,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Hans  Hansen  and  Inger  Jensen.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1853,  in  Den- 
mark, labored  as  a  local  missionary 
six  and  a  half  years  in  Denmark,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1859,  moved  to  Brig- 
ham City  in  1877,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Aug.  9,  1885.  He  died  June 
28,  1911. 

HARPER,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Harper  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1866  to  1899,  was  born  March  5, 
1831,  in  Rickall,  Yorkshire,  England, 
the  son  of  John  Harper  and  Eliza 
Odell.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  27,  1851, 
by  Curtis  E.  Bolton,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1853,  and  was  oi'dained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  9,  1877, 
by  Lorenzo  Snow.  He  died  Nov.  7, 
1899. 

HUNSAKER,  Leo,  Bishop  of  the 
Honeyville  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1928,  was  born 
Feb.  15,  1879,  in  Honeyville,  the  son 


428 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


of  Abraham  Hunsaker  and  Catherine 
Jensen.  He  was  baptized  in  1889,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Oct.  23,  1921,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

IVERSON,  Orson  Alphonzo,  Bishop 
of  the  Bear  River  City  Ward,  Box  El- 
der Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1928, 
was  born  Nov.  13,  1886,  in  Bear  River 
City,  the  son  of  Niels  Iverson  and  Ma- 
rie Bentine  Wilson.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  27,  1894,  ordained  an  Elder  Jan. 
3,  1908,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North 
Central  States  in  1909-1912,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  1,  1912,  by 
David  0.  McKay,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op April  4,  1926,  by  Richard  R.  Ly- 
man. 

JANSON,  Anton  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Brigham  City  3rd  Ward,  Box  Elder 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1890  to  1899,  was 
born  March  26,  1826,  in  Galstad,  Elfs- 
borgs-lan,  Sweden,  the  son  of  Johan 
Janson  and  Ebba  Peterson.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  9,  1854,  by  John  Gron- 
beck,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1858,  lo- 
cated in  Brigham  City  in  1859,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  19,  1877, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  March  24,  1889, 

JENSEN,  Alma,  Bishop  of  the  Cor- 
inne  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1914  to  1920,  was  born  June  12, 
1866,  in  Mantua,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Peter  C.  Jensen  and  Anna 
C.  Petersen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  9, 
1874,  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  filled  a  mission  to  Norway 
in  1906-1908,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  22,  1914,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

JENSEN,  Carl,  Bishop  of  the  Bear 
River  City  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1881  to  1899,  was  born 
July  6,  1840,  in  Glomso,  Soro  amt, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Jens  Carlsen 
and  Matine  D.  Simonsen.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  24, 1865,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1865,  and  became  an  early  settler 
in  Bear  River  City  in  1866.     He  was 


ordained   a   High    Priest   and   Bishop 
Oct.  30,  1881,  by  Lorenzo  Snow. 

JENSEN,  Hans  Peter,  presiding  El- 
der of  Mantua,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1863  to  1877,  was  born  March 
3,  1815,  at  Ny  Hagested,  near  Hol- 
bak,  Sjalland,  Denmark.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  27,  1850,  as  the  first  con- 
vert to  "Mormonism"  in  the  city  of 
Aalborg,  was  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, acted  as  the  first  president  of 
the  Aalborg  Branch,  labored  diligently 
as  a  missionary  in  Denmark,  Norway 
and  Schlesvig,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1853-1854,  and  located  in  Brigham 
City,  where  he  died  May  29, 1882.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p  148.) 

JENSEN,  Mads  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Bear  River  City  Ward,  Box  Elder 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1915  to  1918,  was 
born  March  31,  1861,  in  Brigham  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Mads  C.  Jensen  and 
Gertrude  Petersen.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  1,  1878,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  March  7,  1915,  by  James  E. 
Talmage. 

JENSEN,  Martin  Marinus,  Bishop 
of  the  Mantua  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1910,  was  born 
Dec.  8,  1858,  in  Union,  Iowa,  the  son 
of  Peter  Christian  Jensen  and  Ane 
Christina  Peterson.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  28,  1870,  filled  a  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia in  1883-1885,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  6,  1908, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  died  Nov. 
21,  1910. 

JENSEN,  Orestus,  Bishop  of  the 
Bear  River  City  Ward,  Box  Elder 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  June  6,  1886,  in  Brigham  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Olof  Jensen  and  Mary 
Ralphs.  He  was  baptized  June  7,  1894, 
by  his  father,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  8,  1928, 
by  James  E.  Talmage. 

JENSEN,  Peter  Christian,  Bishop  of 

the   Mantua  Ward,  Box   Elder  Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


429 


Utah,  from  1877  to  1899,  was  born 
Dec.  8,  1827,  in  Stenbroen,  Hjorring 
ami,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Jens  and 
Ane  Christensen.  He  was  baptized 
April  4,  1852,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood and  presided  over  the  Taars 
Branch,  labored  as  a  local  missionary 
five  years,  emigrated  to  the  United 
States  in  1857,  and  arrived  in  Utah  in 
1860,  locating  in  Brigham  City.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  9,  1877.  He  died  in  1899  in 
Mantua. 


JOHNSON,  Peter  Christian,  Bishop 
of  the  Mantua  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1917,  was  born 
Sept.  18,  1859,  in  Tikjobing,  Freder- 
iksborg  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Lars  Jorgensen  and  Anna  Maine  Han- 
sen. He  was  baptized  July  10,  1870, 
by  Jens  Peter  Andreasen;  emigrated 
with  his  mother  to  Utah  in  1870,  and 
located  in  Mantua,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  6,  1908,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb. 
25,  1911,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 


JEPPESEN,  Conrad,  Bishop  of  the 
Mantua  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1917  to  1930-1- ,  was  bom  Dec. 
29,  1871,  in  Mantua,  the  son  of  Ras- 
mus M.  Jeppesen  and  Emelie  Bravant. 
He  was  baptized  April  11,  1880,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  2,  1917,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

JOHNSEN,  Christ  Christensen,  Bish- 
op of  the  Bear  River  City  Ward,  Box 
Elder  Stake,  Utah,  from  1918  to  1926, 
was  born  Dec.  16,  1857,  in  Hasmark, 
Odense  amt  (Fyen),  Denmark,  the  son 
of  Rasmus  Christensen  (Jorgensen) 
and  Ane  Petersen.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  13,  1871,  by  Knud  Mortensen, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1871,  and  lo- 
cated in  Bear  River  City,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1907-1910,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  9,  1918, 
by  Charles  W.  Penrose. 

JOHNSON,  Lars  Ferdinand,  Bishop 
of  the  Bear  River  City  Ward,  Box  El- 
der Stake,  Utah,  from  1899  to  1915, 
was  bom  Nov.  21,  1858,  near  Freder- 
iksborg,  Sjalland,  Denmark,  the  son 
of  Hans  Jorgensen  and  Marie  Brink. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  21,  1858,  near 
Frederiksborg;  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1868,  and  settled  in  Bear  River  City. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  March  8, 
1885,  and  filled  a  mission  to  Denmark 
in  1891-1893.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  4,  1899,  by  Chas.  Kelly, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  21,  1900. 


LEE,  Severin  Norman,  president  of 
the  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah,  from  1916 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  4,  1875,  in 
Brigham  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Sev- 
erin N.  Lee  and  Emma  L.  Ensign.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  21,  1883,  ordained 
a  Seventy  Oct.  6,  1896,  by  Chr.  D. 
Fjeldsted,  and  filled  a  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia  in   1896-1898. 

MADSEN,  Adolph,  first  counselor 
in  the  Box  Elder  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1887  to  1897,  was  born 
June  12,  1841,  in  Maribo  amt,  Lolland, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Niels  Madsen 
and  Martha  Marie  Hansen.  He  was 
baptized  March  25,  1855,  by  Peter 
Mackeprang,  emigrated  to  America  in 
1857,  arrived  in  Utah  in  1860,  and  lo- 
cated in  Brigham  City,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Sept.  9,  1877,  and  served 
as  a  Bishop  of  the  Brigham  City  3rd 
Ward  from  Nov.  12,  1882  to  April  29, 
1888.  He  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Box  Elder  Stake  presiden- 
cy April  29,  1888;  died  Dec.  3,  1929. 

NEELEY,  William,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Bear  River  City  Ward,  Box  El- 
der Stake,  Utah,  from  1870  to  1877, 
and  Bishop  of  Bear  River  City  Ward, 
from  1877  to  1881,  was  bom  Aug.  29, 
1830,  in  Wisconsin,  the  son  of  Lewis 
Neeley  and  Elizabeth  Miller.  He  was 
baptized  in  1845,  by  John  P.  Greene, 
arrived  in  G.  S.  L.  Valley  in  1850,  lo- 
cated in  Bear  River  City  in  1870,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 


430 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


op  Sept.  9,  1877,  by  Lorenzo  Snow.  He 
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  in  Neeley- 
ville,  Idaho,  where  he  acted  as  Bishop 
from  1883  to  1901. 

NICHOLS,  Alvin,  Bishop  of  the 
Brigham  City  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1857  to  1876,  was  born 
Aug.  19,  1819,  in  Upper  Canada,  the 
son  of  Sheldon  Nichols  and  Susannah 
Chipman.  He  was  baptized  in  Can- 
ada in  October,  1834,  by  Lyman  Stod- 
dard, migrated  to  New  York  in  1837, 
and  later  to  Missouri,  where  he  passed 
through  the  persecutions  of  the  Saints, 
moved  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1842  (after 
residing  in  Wisconsin),  located  in  the 
Pottawattamie  country,  Iowa,  in  1846, 
where  he  later  presided  over  the  In- 
dian Creek  Branch,  arrived  in  G.  S. 
L.  Valley  in  1852,  and  located  in  Brig- 
ham  City  in  April,  1855.  He  presided 
over  Brigham  City  and  vicinity  for 
several  years  prior  to  Aug.  19,  1877, 
and  when  the  stake  was  organized  and 
Brigham  City  divided  into  four  wards, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  9, 
1877,  and  called  to  preside  over  the 
Brigham  City  2nd  Ward. 

NIELSEN,  James  (Jens),  Bishop  of 
the  Perry  (formerly  T  h  r  e  e-M  i  1  e 
Creek)  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1896  to  1905,  was  born  Oct.  6, 
1833,  in  Soby,  Hjorring  amt,  Denmark, 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  in 
1854,  and  emigrated  to  America,  ar- 
riving in  G.  S.  L.  City  in  1856.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1884- 
1886.  Soon  afterwards  he  located  at 
Three-Mile  Creek,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  25,  1896, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

PERRY,  Heber  W.,  Bishop  of  the 
Perry  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1913  to  1924,  was  born  Oct.  25, 
1866,  in  Three-Mile-Creek,  or  Perry, 
the  son  of  Henry  E.  Perry  and  Eliza- 
beth Zabriske,  He  was  baptized  May 
4,  1876,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct  24,  1896,  by  Adolph  Madsen,  and 


ordained  a  Bishop  June  6,  1914,  by  Or- 
son F.  Whitney. 

PERRY,  Orrin  Alonzo,  presiding 
Elder  of  Perry,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1875  to  1877,  and  Bishop  from 
1877  to  1896,  was  born  Sept.  11,  1817, 
in  Lewis,  Essex  Co.,  New  York,  the 
son  of  Gustavus  A.  Perry  and  Junus 
Wing.  He  was  baptized  early  in  1839, 
emigrated  to  Far  West,  Mo.,  suffered 
in  the  Missouri  and  Illinois  persecu- 
tions, arrived  in  Utah  in  1855,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  9,  1877,  by  Lorenzo  Snow,  The 
original  name.  Three  Mile  Creek,  was 
changed  to  that  of  Perry  in  his  honor. 

PETERS,  Morris  R.,  Bishop  of  the 
Perry  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1905  to  1913,  was  born  Nov.  22, 
1855,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  David  Peters  and  Laura  Jones.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1865,  by  William 
Neeley,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  25, 
1896,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  April  8,  1905,  by  the  same 
Apostle.    He  died  March  25,  1916. 

RICH,  Abel  Sargent,  Bishop  of  the 
Brigham  City  1st  Ward,  Box  Elder 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  16,  1883,  in  Paris,  Bear 
Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Abel 
George  Rich  and  Mary  Innes.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  4,  1892,  by  James  Nye, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Oct.  23,  1921,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

SCHOW,  Michael  Juul,  Bishop  of  the 
Mantua  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1899  to  1908,  was  born  Sept.  12, 
1845,  in  Aalborg,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Niels  Christian  Schow  and  Marie 
From.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  16,  1854, 
in  Aalborg,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1854, 
and  located  later  in  Brigham  City.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1894- 
1896,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
14,  1897,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Nov.  20,  1899,  by  An- 
thon  H.  Lund,  and  died  May  7,  1925. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


431 


SEDERHOLM,  John  Carlos,  Bishop 
of  the  Brigham  City  2nd  Ward,  Box 
Elder  Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  28,  1885,  in 
Brigham  City,  the  son  of  Carl  Seder- 
holm  (Soderholm)  and  Annie  Valen- 
tine. He  was  baptized  Sept.  7,  1893, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  13,  1910,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Sweden  in  1911-1913.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec,  19,  1926, 
by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Feb.  23,  1930,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

TINGEY,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the  Brig- 
ham City  1st  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1896,  was  born 
Nov.  18,  1819,  in  Biggleswade,  Bed- 
fordshire, England,  the  son  of  James 
Tingey  and  Elizabeth  Bonis.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  11,  1849,  by  Thomas 
Smith,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1849,  lo- 
cated in  Brigham  City  in  1876,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Sept.  9,  1877,  by  Lorenzo  Snow. 
He  died  Feb.  14,  1896. 

TOLMAN,  Abinadi,  Bishop  of  the 
Honeyville  Ward,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  22, 
1884,  at  Honeyville,  the  son  of  Benja- 
min H.  Tolman  and  Eliza  B.  Grant.  He 
was  baptized  in  December,  1892,  by  his 
father.  After  being  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Ole  N.  Stohl,  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1902-1903,  filled 
a  second  mission  to  the  Netherlands 
and  Switzerland  in  1906-1907,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  12,  1917,  by 
Helger  J.  Packer,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op July  8,  1928,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

TYSON,  Emanuel,  Bishop  of  the 
Brigham  City  6th  Ward,  Box  Elder 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1929,  was 
born  May  8,  1874,  in  Randolph,  Rich 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  Tyson 
and  Sarah  Caldwell.  He  was  baptized 
in  1882,  by  Charles  South,  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  J.  Golden  Kimball  Dec. 
3,  1897,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 


States  in  1897-1900,  located  in  Brig- 
ham City  in  1897,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  23,  1921, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

VALENTINE,  August,  Bishop  of 
the  Brigham  City  2nd  Ward,  Box  El- 
der Stake,  Utah,  from  1892  to  1904, 
was  born  Aug.  27,  1837,  on  the  island 
of  Bornholm,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Valentin  Valentinsen  and  Johanne 
Andersen.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  with 
his  parents  in  1852-1853,  and  located 
in  Brigham  City,  where  he  was  bap- 
tized and  ordained  to  the  Priesthood. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1883-1885,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  22,  1892,  by  Lorenzo  Snow. 

VALENTINE,  Nephi  James,  Bishop 
of  the  Brigham  City  2nd  Ward,  Box 
Elder  Stake,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1929, 
was  born  Nov.  15,  1867,  in  Brigham 
City,  the  son  of  Valentin  Valentinsen 
and  Johanne  Andersen.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  8,  1877,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  and  was  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia  Oct.  8,  1897. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
27,  1904,  by  Rudger  Clawson  and  a 
Bishop  April  9,  1922,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

WARD,  George  Welton,  presiding 
Elder  from  1871  to  1877,  and  Bishop 
of  Willard  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1882,  was  born 
Sept.  12,  1814,  in  Liston,  Suffolk,  Eng- 
land. He  was  baptized  in  1849  by 
Thomas  D.  Stenhouse,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  early  days,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  9,  1877,  by  Lorenzo 
Snow.  He  died  Aug,  18,  1882,  in  Wil- 
lard. 

WHITE,  Ephraim,  Bishop  of  Wil- 
lard Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept. 
9,  1876,  at  Willard,  the  son  of  Stephen 
White  and  Agnes  McArthur.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  9,  1884,  filled  a  mission 
to  the   Northern   States  in  1909-1912 


432 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  29,  1920,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

WIGHT,  Thaddeus,  Bishop  of  the 
Harper  Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1911  to  1920,  was  boni  April  14, 
1854,  in  West  Jordan  (Wight's  Fort), 
Utah,  the  son  of  Lyman  Wight  and 
Harriet  Bateman.  He  was  baptized 
in  January,  1866,  by  his  father.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1897-1899  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  22,  1899,  by  Geo.  Kelley, 
and  a  Bishop  May  29,  1910,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant. 

YATES,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the  Har- 
per Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June  6, 
1881,  in  Harper,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Yates  and  Elizabeth  Batey.  He  was 
baptized  in  September,  1899,  ordained 
an  Elder  Sept.  29,  1903,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1914-1916,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Oct.  5,  1919,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

YATES,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the  Har- 
per Ward,  Box  Elder  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1899  to  1911,  was  born  May  17, 
1840,  in  Coalcel,  Yorkshire,  England, 
the  son  of  John  Yates  and  Lucy  Holick. 
He  was  baptized  in  June,  1850,  and 
after  emigrating  to  America  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  29,  1896, 
by  Adolph  Madsen,  and  a  Bishop  Nov. 
20,  1899,  by  Rudger  Clawson.  He  died 
April  23,  1910,  at  Brigham  City,  Utah. 


Hurley  Stake 

BANNER,  Samuel,  president  of  the 
Unity  Branch,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1907  to  1915,  was  born  March  5, 
1880,  in  Derbyshire,  England,  the  son 
of  Samuel  Banner  and  Ellen  Brad- 
ford. He  was  baptized  by  James  Judd, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  April  15, 
1906,  by  Thomas  L.  Allen. 


BARLOW,  Kimber  C,  Bishop  of  the 
Burley  1st  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1923,  was  born  Jan.  14, 
1892,  at  Bountiful,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Truman  Barlow  and  Fannie  Call.  He 
was  baptized  May  6,  1900,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  30,  1919,  by  Wm. 
J.  Black  and  ordained  a  Bishop  July 
27,  1919. 

CHRISTENSEN,  Frederik,  Bishop 
of  the  Springdale  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  2,  1880,  in  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Anders  Christensen  and  Bergitte  Caro- 
line Andersen.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
2,  1888,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  25,  1923,  by  Geo.  H.  Lewis,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  5,  1927,  by 
David  0.  McKay. 

DARRINGTON,  John  Charles,  Bish- 
op of  the  Declo  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  12,  1880,  at  Elba,  Idaho,  the  son 
of  John  Darrington  and  Sarah  Jane 
Lowe.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  20,  1888, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  9,  1900,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Colorado  in  1900- 
1903.  He  acted  as  presiding  Elder 
from  1913  until  the  ward  was  organ- 
ized, was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
13,  1916,  by  Wm.  T.  Harper,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Feb.  17,  1929,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

DRAKE,  Lewis  Wells,  Bishop  of  the 
Burley  3rd  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
11,  1878,  in  Wilson,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Daniel  N.  Drake  and  Mary  Jane 
Cheeney.  He  was  baptized  July  7, 
1887,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  27, 
1921,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Nov.  26,  1922,  by  Hyrum 
G.  Smith. 

DRANEY,  Lehi  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
View  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1925  to  1928,  was  born  Oct.  19,  1882, 
at  Plain  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Sam- 
uel P.  Draney  and  Angeline  Richard- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


433 


son.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  2,  1890, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  25,  1923, 
by  John  A.  Widtsoe,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  May  3,  1926,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

FOUTZ,  George  T.,  Bishop  of  the 
Burley  1st  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1923  to  1927,  was  born  Sept.  18, 
1882,  in  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Jacob  Foutz  and  Sarah  A,  Thorne. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  14,  1892,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Feb.  23,  1923,  by  John  A.  Widtsoe. 

GEE,  Asahel  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Unity  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho,  in 
1930 +  ,  was  born  June  3,  1878,  in 
Provo,  Utah,  the  son  of  George  W. 
Gee  and  Ursula  Bandlay.  He  was  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood  and  filled  a 
mission  \o  the  Southern  States  in 
1902-1904.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  26,  1930,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

HALL,  Horace  Osborne,  second 
counselor  in  the  Burley  Stake  presi- 
dency, Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Dec.  25,  1892,  in  Hyrum, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Hiram  Hall  and  Ly- 
dia  Osborne.  He  was  baptized  July 
6,  1901,  ordained  an  Elder  March  30, 
1914,  and  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1914-1916.  He  was  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Feb.  24,  1924,  by  Geo.  Al- 
bei't  Smith  and  presided  over  the  Bur- 
ley 2nd  Ward  until  Dec.  2,  1928,  when 
he  was  set  apart  as  2nd  counselor  in 
the  stake  presidency. 

HARRIS,  David  Oscar,  Bishop  of 
the  Burley  2nd  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930,  was  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Sept.  1,  1929,  by  David 
O.  McKay. 

HARRIS,  Lawrence  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Unity  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1915  to  1920,  and  from  1925  to 
1930,  was  born  July  7,  1881,  in  Upton, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jonathan  Harris  and 


Dorcas  Dann.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  July  25,  1915,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards, and  set  apart  Feb.  7,  1925,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  to  serve  a  second 
term. 

LAMPH,  David  Daniel,  Bishop  of 
Burley  2nd  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1928  to  1929,  was  born  April 

27,  1892,  in  Cleveland,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  T.  Lamph  and  Jennie  C. 
Bennett.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  1,  1929. 

LEWIS,  George  Henry,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Burley  Stake  presidency, 
Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
May  20,  1877,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Elias  Lewis  and  Eleanor 
Roberts.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Western  States  in  1899-1901,  moved 
to  Burley  in  May,  1917,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  the  stake  presidency  by 
John  L.  Smith  July  27,  1919,  and  was 
promoted  to  first  counselor  May  11, 
1924. 

LIVINGSTON,  Charles  C,  Bishop 
of  the  Springdale  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1919,  was  born 
Feb.  6,  1868,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  C.  Livingston  and 
Agnes  Widdison.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  28,  1877,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  24,  1915, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith, 

McKIBBEN,  Robert  G.,  Bishop  of 
the  Burley  3rd  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1921  to  1922,  was  born 
Aug.  10,  1873,  in  Galveston,  Texas, 
the  son  of  John  McKibben  and  Ger- 
trude Bingham.  He  was  baptized  May 

28,  1920,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  27,  1921,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

NELSON,  Nels  C,  Bishop  of  the 
Burley  2nd  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1921  to  1924,  was  born  Feb.  14, 
1860,  in  Goshen,  Utah,  the  son  of  Nels 


Vol.  IV.  No.  28 


July   11,  193G 


434 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


C.  Nelson  and  Catherine  Jensen.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  27,  1921, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

OLSON,  Lorenzo  Emil,  Bishop  of 
the  Declo  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1916  to  1927,  was  born  Nov.  6, 
1867,  at  Moroni,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Jens  C.  Olson  and  Karen 
Marie  Hansen.  He  was  baptized  in 
1876,  ordained  a  High  Priest  July  15, 
1913,  by  David  0.  McKay,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  13,  1916,  by  Da- 
vid O.  McKay.  He  died  Dec.  12,  1927, 
at  Declo,  Idaho. 

PATTERSON,  John  Wallace,  Bish- 
op of  the  View  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  16,  1885,  at  Riverdale,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  F.  Patterson  and  Mary  A. 
Bybee.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  4,  1894, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  6,  1927, 
by  David  O.  McKay,  and  a  Bishop 
April  29,  1928,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

PETERSON,  James  O.,  Bishop  of 
the  Pella  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1920  to  1924,  was  born  March  25, 
1878,  in  Newton,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Jens  O.  Peterson  and  Karen  Marie 
Olsen.  He  was  baptized  April  4,  1886, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  1,  1914, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  May  23,  1920. 

RANDALL,  Clarence  Dilmon,  a  Bish- 
op of  the  Pella  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Jan.  7,  1888,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Charles  Franklin  Randall  and  Sar- 
ah Ann  Smith.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
4,  1898,  ordained  an  Elder  April  21, 
1912,  by  Wm.  T.  Jack,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1919-1920, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  10,  1924,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

REEDER,  Jesse  C,  Bishop  of  the 
View  Ward,  Bui'ley  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1910  to  1916,  was  born  July  23,  1876, 


in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
George  B.  Reeder  and  Caroline  Mad- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  2,  1884, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  April  17,  1910, 
having  previously  acted  as  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Branch. 

ROBBINS,  Lorenzo  Wilson,  Bishop 
of  the  Burley  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1906  to  1915,  was  born 
Jan.  9,  1867,  in  Weston,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Wilson  C.  Robbins  and  Minnie 
Kofoed.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  12, 
1879,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
30,  1901,  by  Wm.  T.  Jack,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  June  8,  1906,  in  Salt  Lake 
City. 

SMITH,  Charles  Henry,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Pella  Branch,  Burley 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1911  to  1918,  and 
Bishop  of  the  Pella  Ward  from  1913 
to  1920,  was  born  Oct.  12,  1873,  in 
Willard,  Utah,  the  son  of  George 
Smith  and  Elizabeth  Altrop.  He  was 
baptized  in  1881,  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  July,  1900,  by  Jos.  W.  McMurrin, 
filled  a  mission  to  England  in  1900- 
1903,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb. 
1,  1914,  by  Rudger  Clawson.  He  moved 
to  Star  Ward  and  acted  as  Bishop  of 
that  ward  from  1927  to  1930. 

STEINER,  John  Ernest,  Bishop  of 
the  Springdale  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1924  to  1927,  was  born 
May  30,  1869,  in  Chaude-de-Fonds, 
Switzerland.  He  was  baptized  in  April, 
1877,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 
18,  1901,  by  Helaman  Pratt,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  11,  1924,  by  Mel- 
vin  J,  Ballard. 

STOKES,  Archie,  Bishop  of  the 
Unity  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1920  to  1921,  was  born  July  24, 
1886,  in  Draper,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Stokes  and  Ellen  L.  Canfield. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  5, 1894,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  March  6,  1905,  by  David 
R.  Langlois,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  22, 
1920. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


436 


TILLEY,  Alma  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Star  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1920  to  1926,  was  born  Aug.  25, 
1875,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Henry  Tilley  and  Ellen  Measom. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  7,  1884,  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  July  4,  1920,  by 
David  Langlois,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Nov.  28,  1920,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ai'ds. 

TINSLEY,  William  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Unity  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1921  to  1925,  was  born  May  16, 

1887,  at  West  Weber,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Edwin  Tinsley  and  Amanda  Cole. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  14, 
1921,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

UNANDER,  Ralph  Peter,  Bishop 
of  the  Burley  1st  Ward,  Burley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930,  was  born 
Sept.  23,  1890,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Peter  Unander  and  Margaret 
Isabel  Golightly.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  1,  1903,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  5,  1927,  by 
David  0.  McKay. 

WAITE,  William  L.,  Bishop  of  the 
Burley  4th  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1921  to  1924,  was  boi'n  Aug. 
23,  1872,  at  Bountiful,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  A.  Waite  and  Margaret 
Barnes.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  3,  1881, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  28, 
1921,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

WHITTIER,  Raymond,  Bishop  of 
the  Delco  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1927  to  1929,  was  born  Oct.  6, 

1888,  in  Milton,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  Whittier  and  Annie  Madson.  He 
was  baptized  in  August,  1895,  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Feb.  8,  1925,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  6, 
1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

WOOD,  Charles  Samuel,  Bishop  of 
the  View  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1925,  was  born  July  11, 


1861,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Chai'les  Wood  and  Alice  Herrick.  He 
was  baptized  in  June,  1872,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  July  22,  1900,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Nov.  23,  1919,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

WOODBURY,  Angus  C,  Bishop  of 
the  View  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1916  to  1919,  was  born  May  20, 
1873,  the  son  of  Orrin  Woodbury  and 
Ann  Cannon.  He  was  baptized  in 
1881  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  July 
30,  1916,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

WRIGHT,  Edgar  M.,  Bishop  of  the 
Burley  2nd  Ward,  Burley  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1919  to  1921,  was  born  July 
21,  1876,  in  Bennington,  Idaho,  the  son 
of  Amos  R.  Wright  and  Catherine 
Roberts.  He  was  baptized  July  21, 
1884,  filled  a  mission  in  1908-1910,  to 
Great  Britain,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  July  27,  1919. 


Cache  Stake 


BALLARD,    Henry    William,    jun^ 

Bishop  of  the  Benson  Ward,  Cache 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1930  +  ,  was 
born  Dec.  1,  1888,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Henry  William  Ballai*d  and  Al- 
vira  Davidson.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
21,  1897,  was  ordained  an  Elder  Jan. 
5,  1910,  by  Wallace  Wesley  Roundy, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States  in  1911-1913  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  5, 
1921,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

BENSON,  Serge  Ballif,  Bishop  of 
the  Logan  4th  Wai'd,  Cache  Stake. 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1930,  was  born  in 
October,  1877,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son 
of  George  Taft  Benson  and  Louisa 
Ballif.  He  was  baptized  in  1885,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Oct.  8,  1900,  by  John 
Henry  Smith,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1900-1902,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  5,  1920. 


436 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


BUDGE,  Oliver  Hyer,  first  counse- 
lor in  the  presidency  of  the  Cache 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1911  to  1920,  was 
born  April  3,  1873,  in  Pai'is,  Idaho,  a 
son  of  William  Budge  and  Ann  Hyer. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  7, 
1896,  by  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Switzerland  and 
Germany  in  1896-1899. 

CRANNEY,  Willard  Duane,  Bishop 
of  the  Petersboro  Ward,  Cache  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1887  to  1896,  was  born 
Aug.  24,  1848,  in  Sheboygan,  Wiscon- 
sin, the  son  of  H.  K.  Cranney  and  Eliz- 
abeth Boughy.  He  was  baptized  by  L. 
M.  Durfey  in  1862  and  oi'dained  a 
Bishop  July  24,  1887,  by  Moses 
Thatcher. 

CROOK  STON,      Nicholas      Welch, 

Bishop  of  the  Greenville  Ward  (later 
the  North  Logan  Ward),  Cache  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1891-1911,  was  born  Oct.  22, 
1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Robert  Crookston  and  Ann  Welch. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  2, 
1891,  by  Moses  Thatcher. 

EVERTON,  Walter  Marion,  second 
counselor  in  the  Cache  Stake  presiden- 
cy, Utah,  from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Oct.  22,  1876,  in  Smithfield,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Marion  C.  Everton  and  Eliza- 
beth Pitcher.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
22,  1884,  by  his  father,  ordained  a 
Seventy  June  16,  1896,  by  B.  H,  Rob- 
erts, filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1896-1898,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  June  5,  1917,  by 
George  F.  Richards. 

GRIFFIN,     William     Henry,     jun.. 

Bishop  of  the  Logan  4th  Ward,  Cache 
Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan. 
11,  1872,  at  Newton,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
son  of  William  Hyrum  Griffin  and 
Elizabeth  Ti-eherne.  He  was  baptized 
April  25,  1880,  by  his  father,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1897-1900 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  David 
0.  McKay. 


HYDE,  Charles  Gloyd,  Bishop  of 
the  Hyde  Park  Ward,  Cache  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1892  to  1922,  was  born 
Nov.  13,  1861,  at  Hyde  Park,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  Hyde  and  Abigail 
Gloyd.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  23,  1869, 
ordained  an  Elder  July  5,  1885,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States  in  1890-1892.  He  died  Nov.  28, 
1922,  at  Hyde  Park,  Utah. 

JORGENSEN,  Abraham,  Bishop  of 
the  Logan  9th  Ward,  Cache  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1924,  was  born 
Jan.  9,  1859,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Hans  Jorgensen  and  Dorthea 
Christiansen.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  19,  1906,  by  Ed.  W.  Smith. 

KEMP,  John  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Noi'th  Logan  (formerly  Greenville) 
Ward,  Cache  Stake,  Utah,  from  1911 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept.  14,  1878,  in 
Lewiston,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Kemp  and  Rachel  B.  Strickland. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  14,  1886,  by  his 
father,  ordained  an  Elder  April  18, 
1902,  by  Joseph  F.  Pond,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  4,  1912, 
by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 

LINDQUIST,  George  William,  first 
counselor  in  the  Cache  Stake  pi'esi- 
dency  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  29,  1871,  in  Logan,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Nils  A.  Lindquist  and 
Josephine  C.  Hogland.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  5,  1879,  by  Hans  J.  Chris- 
tiansen, ordaine(i  a  Seventy  by  John 
Morgan,  April  8,  1890,  filled  a  mission 
to  Sweden  in  1892-1894,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  May  7,  1911,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct. 
14,   1917. 

MAUGHAN,  Willard  W.,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Cache  Stake,  Utah,  from  1901  to  1906, 
was  born  Aug.  31,  1854,  in  E  T  City, 
Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Peter  and 
Mary  Ann  Maughan.  He  was  oi'dained 
a  High  Priest  Dec.  19,  1870,  by  Peter 
Maughan.    He  died  April  30,  1924. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


437 


NEWBOLD,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the 
Logan  4th  Ward,  Cache  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1906  to  1913,  was  born  April 
12,  1858,  in  Breashows,  England,  a 
son  of  John  Newbold  and  Elizabeth 
Deakin.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  22, 
1867,  by  John  Newbold,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  28, 
1906,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

PERRY,  Leslie  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
the  Logan  9th  Ward,  Cache  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  17,  1885,  in  Three-Mile  Creek 
(Perry),  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Henry  M.  Perry  and  Fanny  Young. 
He  was  baptized  July  23,  1893,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  July  26, 
1914,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

SCHAUB,  Karl  Conrad,  Bishop  of 
the  Logan  10th  Ward,  Cache  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  12,  1869,  in  Zizers,  Canton  Grau- 
bunden,  Switzerland,  a  son  of  Conrad 
Karl  Schaub  and  Marie  Alker.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  8,  1887,  by  Adolph 
Baer,  emigrated  to  Utah  with  his  fa- 
ther in  1888,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Oct.  14,  1917,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards. 

SEAMONS,  James  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Hyde  Park  Ward,  Cache  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  11,  1878,  in  Hyde  Park,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Samuel  Seamons  and  Sarah 
Hurren.  He  was  baptized  March  11, 
1886,  ordained  a  Seventy  July  28,  1897, 
by  Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1897-1899, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  March  11,  1923,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 


Carbon  Stake 


CARTER,  Charles  Byron,  Bishop  of 
the  Helper  Ward,  Carbon  Stake,  Utah, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  9,  1872,  in 
Mt.  Pleasant,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 


Carter  and  Almeda  Janette  McAr- 
thur.  He  was  baptized  in  July,  1880, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  11,  1895,  by 
George  Reynolds,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1895-1898. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June 
28,  1924,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  June  22,  1930,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards, 

EDWARDS,  Stanley  Harrison,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Hiawatha  Branch, 
Carbon  Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to 
1930,  was  born  Oct.  26,  1889,  in  Ster- 
ling, Utah,  the  son  of  Harrison  M. 
Edwards  and  Anna  Jensen.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  4,  1898,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1913-1915, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  presiding  Elder  by  Ar- 
thur W.  Horsley  March  13,  1927. 

EVANS,  Morgan  D.,  Bishop  of  the 
Castle  Gate  Ward,  Carbon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1911  to  1921,  was  born  Jan. 
2,  1863,  the  son  of  Benjamin  Evans 
and  Mary  Eynon.  He  was  baptized  in 
1872,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  14, 
1902,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Oct.  1,  1911,  by  Pa- 
triarch Hyrum  G.  Smith.  He  acted  as 
presiding  Elder  from  1909  to  1911,  in 
Castle  Gate. 

FRANDSEN,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Price  Ward,  Carbon  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1882  to  1896,  was  born  May  31,  1834, 
on  the  isle  of  Langeland,  Denmark, 
the  son  of  Frauds  Jorgensen  and  Ane 
Marie  Rasmussen.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  27,  1855,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1856,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov. 
20,  1882. 

FULLMER,  Edwin  D.,  Bishop  of 
the  Spring  Glen  Ward,  Carbon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1893  to  1899,  was  born 
March  13,  1860,  in  Provo,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  S.  Fullmer  and  Olive  A. 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  3,  1876, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  8, 
1893,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.    He  had 


438 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


acted  as  presiding  Elder  from  1892  to 
1893  in  the  Spring  Glen  Branch  before 
the  Spring  Glen  Ward  was  organized. 

GUYMON,  Orson  Henry,  second 
counselor  in  the  Carbon  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  April  6,  1878,  in  Fountain 
Green,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  Al- 
bert Guymon  and  Marcella  Orilla 
Fowles.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  in  1913-1915,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  19,  1915,  by 
Arthur  W.  Horsley,  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Carbon  Stake 
presidency  Sept.  29,  1929. 

HOPKINSON,  Albert  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Sunnyside  Ward,  Carbon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  10,  1877,  in  Paplewick,  Notting- 
hamshire, England,  the  son  of  Math- 
ew  Hopkinson  and  Mai'garet  Bei-es- 
ford.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1900, 
was  baptized  Nov.  16,  1893,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Jan.  28,  1916,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  March  28,  1926,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

HORSLEY,  Arthur  William,  presi- 
dent of  the  Carbon  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1913  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June  18, 
1860,  in  Totten,  Middlesex  Co.,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Samuel  P.  Horsley 
and  Sarah  Barrows.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  14,  1870,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1877,  and  was  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Carbon  Stake  April  13,  1913,  by 
Francis   M.   Lyman. 

INGLES,  John  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Scofield  Ward,  Carbon  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1901  to  1902,  was  born  Aug.  24, 
1851,  at  Paisley,  Scotland,  the  son  of 
Robert  Ingles  and  Elizabeth  Eccles. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  Scotland  in  1921- 
1923  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  July 
28,  1901,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

JORGENSEN,  George  Edgar,  Bish- 
op of  the  Price  Ward,  Carbon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 


Aug.  26,  1884,  in  Burrville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  Smith  and  Lena  Winkler. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  11,  1898,  or- 
dained an  Elder  June  12,  1908,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in  1908- 
1911.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  10,  1912,  and  a  Bishop  June  22, 
1930,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

McMULLIN,  Albert  Eals,  Bishop  of 
the  Wellington  Ward,  Carbon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1890  to  1901,  was  born 
July  15,  1847,  in  Waldo  County,  Maine 
(Fox  Islands),  the  son  of  Henry  Mc- 
MuUin  and  Mary  Pierce.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1855,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  12,  1890,  by  He- 
be r  J.  Grant. 

MILLER,  James  Nathan,  Bishop  of 
the  Spring  Glen  Ward,  Carbon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1900  to  1905,  was  born 
March  3,  1870,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  William  Miller  and  Margaret 
Neibaur.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  5,  1900,  by  George  Teasdale. 

PARMLEY,  Thomas  Jenison,  Bish- 
op of  the  Pleasant  Valley  Ward,  Car- 
bon Stake,  Utah,  from  1888  to  1920, 
was  born  Oct.  22,  1855,  in  Durham, 
Grimsby,  England,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Parmley  and  Mary  Jenison.  He  was 
baptized  May  26,  1869,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1881,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  17,  1888,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

PETTIT,  John  Edward,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Carbon  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
July  10,  1864,  in  Dunstall  Green,  Suf- 
folk, England.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
21,  1881,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1887 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bi.shop  Sept.  29,  1904,  by  John  Henry 
Smith.  He  was  set  apai't  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Carbon  Stake  presidency 
Jan.  9,  1929,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

POTTER.  John,  Bishop  of  the  Sun- 
nyside   Ward,    Carbon    Stake,    Utah, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


439 


from  1900  to  1906,  was  born  Dec.  6, 
1861,  in  Kearsley,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Samson  E.  Potter  and 
Sarah  Chatterton.  He  was  baptized 
in  1879,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1884, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  July  17,  1900,  by  John  W. 
Taylor. 

ROWLEY,  John  Thomson,  Bishop 
of  the  Spring  Glen  Ward,  Carbon 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1906  to  1910,  was 
born  Nov.  7,  1847,  in  Glasgow,  Scot- 
land, the  son  of  Ralph  Nephi  Rowley 
and  Mary  Ann  Thomson.  He  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1850,  was  baptized  in  1855, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  15,  1905, 
by  John  H.  Pace,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Jan.  15,  1906,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 
He  died  Jan.  31,  1925. 

RUFF,  George,  Bishop  of  the  Sco- 
field  Wai'd,  Carbon  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1902  to  1929,  was  born  Jan.  18,  1850, 
in  Dillington,  Huntingtonshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  James  Ruff  and  Eliza 
Medlock.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  11, 
1860,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1878,  filled 
a  mission  to  England  in  1898-1900, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  July  20, 
1902,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith.  He  died 
Jan.  27,  1935. 

STAPLEY,  William  Berry,  Bishop 
of  the  Castle  Gate  Ward,  Carbon 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  , 
was  box'n  Feb.  3,  1889,  in  Kanarra, 
Utah,  the  son  of  James  L.  Stapley  and 
Harriet  Berry.  He  was  baptized  June 
6,  1897,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1913-1916,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Sept.  25,  1921, 
by  James  E.  Talmage,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  June  22,  1924,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 

STOKER,  William  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Price  Ward,  Carbon  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1923  to  1929,  was  born  April  27,  1875, 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  the  son  of  Mi- 
chael Stoker  and  Almira  Jane  Wil- 
son.   He  was   baptized  June  7,  1882, 


was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  8, 
1921,  and  a  Bishop  April  7,  1923,  by 
George  F.  Richards. 

STOWELL,  Heber  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Spring  Glen  Ward,  Carbon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1889  to  1892,  was  born 
July  14,  1860,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Wm,  R.  R.  Stowell  and  Cynthia 
Jane  Parks.  He  was  baptized  in  Aug- 
ust, 1868,  and  oi-dained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  11,  1889. 

THAYNE,  Edgar  Hunt,  Bishop  of 
the  Wellington  Ward,  Carbon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1907  to  1910,  was  born 
March  30,  1869,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  Johnson  Thayne 
and  Elizabeth  Hunt.  He  was  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  May  7,  1893,  by  B.  H. 
Roberts,  filled  a  mission  to  Australia 
in  1899-1901,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  15,  1902,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Jan.  21,  1907,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

THOMAS,    Benjamin    Foster,   jun.. 

Bishop  of  the  Castle  Gate  Ward,  Car- 
bon Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1924, 
was  born  Aug.  5,  1875,  in  Merthyr 
Tydvil,  Wales,  the  son  of  Benjamin 
Thomas  and  Bridget  Thomas.  He  was 
baptized  in  August,  1883,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  25, 
1921,  by  James  E.  Talmage.  He  was 
killed  in  a  mine  explosion  March  8, 
1924,  at  Castle  Gate. 

WOOTTON,  George  A.,  Bishop  of 
the  Price  Ward,  Carbon  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1921  to  1922,  was  born  June  18, 
1870,  in  Midway,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Attewall  Wootton  and  Cynthia  J. 
Jewett.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  28, 
1879,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  8, 
1921,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 


Cassia  Stake 


ADAMS,  John  Fredrick,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakley  1st  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1921  to  1928,  was  born 


440 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


May  14,  1882.  He  was  baptized  Dec. 
7,  1901,  ordained  a  High  Priest  July 
3,  1916,  and  a  Bishop  May  1,  1921,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

ADAMS,  John,  jun..  Bishop  of  the 
Oakley  3rd  Ward,  Cassia  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1917  to  1928,  was  born  July 
22,  1858,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Adams  and  Mary  Caroline  How- 
ells.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  4,  1917,  by  Wm.  T.  Jack,  and 
a  Bishop  July  29,  1917,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

CLARK,  Charles  S.,  president  of 
Cassia  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  16,  1892,  in 
Grantsville,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas 
H.  Clark  and  Rachel  S.  Hale.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  1,  1912,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Netherlands  in  1912- 
1915,  ordained  a  High  Priest  July  29, 
1918,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  Cassia  Stake 
Oct.  20,  1928,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

CRANNEY,  Wilbur  Thomas,  Bish- 
op of  the  Marion  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1920  to  1926,  was  born 
Jan.  4,  1872,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Hyrum  King  Cranney  and  Eliza- 
beth White.  He  was  baptized  in  May 
1881,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
6,  1916,  by  Wm.  T.  Harper,  and  a 
Bishop  Oct.  31,  1920,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

CRITCHFIELD,  Lewis  Robert,  Bish- 
op of  the  Oakley  3rd  Ward,  Cassia 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930  + ,  was 
born  April  29,  1894,  in  Oakley,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  Lewis  A.  Critchfield  and 
Jane  Wilson.  He  was  baptized  June  6, 
1903,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1915-1919,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  25,  1919,  by  Pres. 
Wm,  T.  Jack,  and  a  Bishop  Jan.  13, 
1929,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

DAYLEY,  Enoch  Rhoades,  Bishop 
of  the  Spring  Basin  (or  Basin)  Ward, 


Cassia  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1887  to 
1892,  was  born  Sept.  19,  1837,  in 
Grand  River  Township,  Caldwell  Co., 
Missouri,  the  son  of  James  Dayley, 
sen.,  and  Isabella  McBride.  He  was 
baptized  in  April,  1850,  at  Keg  Creek, 
Iowa,  came  to  Utah  in  1852,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  22,  1887,  by  John  W.  Taylor. 

HAIGHT,  Hector  Caleb,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakley  1st  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1901  to  1916,  was  born 
Aug.  18,  1869,  in  Farmington,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Horton  D.  Haight  and 
Louise  Leavitt.  He  was  baptized  in 
1887,  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  9,  1901, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  died  March 
23,  1916. 

HALE,  Wallace  Aroet,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakley  2nd  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 -f,  was  born 
Oct.  11,  1886,  in  Oakley,  the  son  of 
Solomon  E.  Hale  and  Louisa  Hyde 
Hunter.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  11, 
1894,  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  29,  1906, 
by  Marcus  O.  Funk,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Central  States  in  1906-1908, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  11, 
1913,  by  Wm.  T.  Jack,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Nov.  21,  1926,  by  John  A. 
Widtsoe. 

HARDY,  William  Gilbert,  second 
counselor  in  the  Cassia  Stake  presi- 
dency, Idaho,  from  July  to  October, 
1928,  was  born  Feb.  6,  1899,  in  Colo- 
nia  Juarez,  Mexico,  the  son  of  Geo. 
Wm.  Hardy  and  Emma  S.  Rowley.  He 
was  baptized  in  March,  1907,  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  22, 
1928,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  was 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  in  the 
Cassia  Stake  presidency^  Oct.  20,  1928, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

HARPER,  Reese  Morris,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakley  4th  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1929,  was  born 
Feb.  19,  1863,  in  Calls  Fort,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Thomas   Hai-per  and  Hannah 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


441 


Jones.  After  being  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty Oct.  11,  1892,  by  Seymour  B.  Young 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Indian  Ter- 
ritory in  1892-1894,  and  a  second  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1904-1906.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  31, 
1907,  by  Wm.  T.  Jack,  and  a  Bishop 
April  25,  1915,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

HARPER,  Seth  F.,  Bishop  of  the 
Basin  Ward,  Cassia  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1923,  was  born  Nov.  25, 
1892,  the  son  of  Wm.  T.  Harper  and 
Annie  Loveland.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
25,  1900,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  6,  1919,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 

HUNTER,  Rose!  Hyde,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakley  2nd  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1901  to  1910,  the  son  of 
Edward  Hunter  and  Martha  Ann 
Hyde,  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
9,  1901,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

MARTIN,  John  S.,  Bishop  of  the 
Basin  Ward,  Cassia  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
2,  1889,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  G.  Martin  and  Mary  Myers.  He 
was  ordained  an  Elder  April  12,  1908, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1908-1910,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  19,  1929,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

MARTIN,  Moses  S.,  first  counselor 
in  the  Cassia  Stake  presidency,  Idaho, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
29,  1891,  in  Basin,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
John  G.  Martin  and  Mary  Sagers.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  2,  1900,  ordained 
an  Elder  April  14,  1912,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Central  States  in  1912-1914, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
14,  1915,  by  John  L.  Smith,  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Basin  Ward  April  22,  1923,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  was  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  Oct.  21,  1928,  by  Steph- 
en L.  Richards. 


McBRIDE,  Elam  Wells,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakley  3rd  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1901  to  1904,  was  born 
Sept.  18,  1854,  in  Grantsville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  McBride  and  Olive 
Cheeney.  He  was  baptized  May  30, 
1863,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1881-1882  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Aug.  9,  1901,  by  Rudger 
Clawson.    He  died  June  14,  1927. 

MERCER,  Jared  Alma,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakley  1st  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930,  was  born 
Feb.  15,  1882,  in  American  Fork,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Ammon  Mercer  and  Sarah 
Amelia  Shelley.  He  was  baptized  May 
1,  1890,  filled  a  misson  to  the  Western 
States  in  1902-1904,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  19, 
1929,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

PICKETT,  Eugene,  Bishop  of  the 
Marion  Ward,  Cassia  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1926  to  1930,  was  born  Sept.  22, 
1885,  in  Marion,  the  son  of  Moroni 
Pickett  and  Frances  A.  Clegg.  He 
was  baptized  July  5,  1894,  filled  a 
mission  to  Ireland  in  1907-1910  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op April  18,  1926,  by  Richard  R.  Ly- 
man. 

PICKETT,  Moroni,  first  counselor 
in  the  Cassia  Stake  presidency,  Idaho, 
from  1887  to  1900,  was  born  Oct.  16, 
1848,  in  Berkshire,  England,  the  son 
of  Matthew  Pickett  and  Harriet  Po- 
cock.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1862, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1879-1880,  moved  to  Cassia  County, 
Idaho,  in  1882,  and  was  set  apart  as 
fii'st  counselor  Nov.  19,  1887,  by  John 
W.  Taylor.    He  died  Oct.  16,  1911. 

PICKETT,  Oliver  Benjamin,  Bishop 
of  the  Oakley  3rd  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1904  to  1914,  was  born  in 
Laketown,  Utah,  the  son  of  Moroni 
Pickett  and  Amelia  Clegg.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northwestern  States  in 
1902-1904   and  was   ordained   a   High 


442 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  4,  1904,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith.  lie  died  Jan.  19, 
1933. 

SESSIONS,  Harvey,  Bishop  of  the 
Marion  Ward,  Cassia  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1910  to  1920,  was  born  June  13, 
1859,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Perrigrene  Sessions  and  Lucina  Call. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwest- 
ern States  in  1910-1911,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  6,  1893,  by  Moroni 
Pickett,  and  a  Bishop  June  13,  1911. 

SEVERE,  George  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakley  2nd  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1926,  was  born 
Sept.  18,  1877,  in  Grantsville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Hyrum  H.  Severe  and  Le- 
nora  Easton.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
14,  1888,  ordained  a  Seventy  April  11, 
1898,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1898- 
1900,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
May,  1907,  and  a  Bishop  July  25,  1915, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

SMITH,  Adam  Gibson,  Bishop  of  the 
Marion  Ward,  Cassia  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1887  to  1910,  was  born  Feb.  14, 
1852,  in  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  the  son 
of  John  B.  Smith  and  Margaret  Gib- 
son. He  was  baptized  April  14,  1861, 
in  Tooele,  came  to  Utah  in  1852,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  21,  1887, 
by  John  W.  Taylor.  He  died  June  13, 
1911. 

THOMAS,  David  P.,  Bishop  of  the 
Oakley  4th  Ward,  Cassia  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1906  to  1915,  was  born  Feb.  17, 
1858,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Wm.  C.  Thomas  and  Margaret  Phil- 
lips. He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan. 
28,  1906,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and 
died  April  19,  1924. 

THURBER,  Albert  Daniel,  Bishop 
of  the  Oakley  1st  Ward,  Cassia  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1916  to  1921,  was  born 
May  13,  1854,  in  Palmyra,  Utah.  He 
was  set  apart  as  Bishop  July  30,  1916, 


by  David  O.  McKay,  having  previously 
acted  as  a  Bishop  in  Mexico.  He  died 
Jan.  22,  1931. 

WILSON,  Benjamin  Franklin,  Bish- 
op of  the  Oakley  3rd  Ward,  Cassia 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1914  to  1917,  was 
born  July  15,  1872,  in  Eden,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Robert  Wilson  and  Ann  Blood. 
He  was  baptized  in  1880,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Oct.  10,  1914,  by  Wm. 
T.  Jack,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  25,  1914, 
by  David  0.  McKay. 


Cottonwood  Stake 

ANDRUS,  Mile,  jun..  Bishop  of  the 
Big  Cottonwood  Ward,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1905  to  1911,  was 
born  Sept.  30,  1848,  in  Livei-pool,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Milo  Andrus  and  Sarah 
Ann  Miles.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1850,  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  July 
15,  1877,  by  Daniel  H.  Wells. 

AUSTIN,  Francis  Mark,  Bishop  of 
the  Cottonwood  Ward,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1929,  was 
born  Feb.  3,  1896,  in  Lehi,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Mark  Austin  and  Maria  Jane 
Vaughn.  He  filled  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand  in  1915-1919,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  20,  1922,  and  a  Bish- 
op in  Dec,  1929,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

BELLISTON,       William       Thomas. 

Bishop  of  the  Murray  1st  Ward,  Cot- 
tonwood Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to 
1928,  was  born  Oct.  1,  1892,  in  Nephi. 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Wm.  Bellis- 
ton  and  Elizabeth  Foster.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  31,  1901,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  21,  1926, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

BENNION,  Hyrum,  jun.,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  Cot- 
tonwood Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to 
1927,  was  born  April  3,  1879,  in  Tay- 
lorsviUe,  the  son  of  Hyrum  Bennion 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


443 


and  Eliza  Ann  Marker.  He  was  baptiz- 
ed June  2,  1887,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  12,  1907,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  14, 
1914,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  acted 
as  Bishop  of  the  Taylorsville  Ward 
from  1914  to  1921. 

BRINGHURST,     Samuel     Enoch, 

Bishop  of  the  Murray  1st  Ward,  Cot- 
tonwood Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  27,  1890,  at  Ben- 
nion,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  B.  Bring- 
hurst  and  Emma  Tripp.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  3,  1898,  filled  a  mission  to 
Germany  in  1909-1912,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  March  6,  1928,  by 
David  0.  McKay. 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1905  to  1911,  was 
born  May  7,  1850,  in  Council  Bluffs, 
Iowa,  the  son  of  William  Casto  and 
Racheline  Cornog.  He  came  to  Utah 
in  1851,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  15,  1877,  by  Daniel  H. 
Wells.     He  died  Oct.  18,  1904. 

CORNWALL,  Alma  Millen,  Bishop 
of  the  Mill  Creek  Ward,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Feb.  18,  1881,  in  Mill  Creek, 
the  son  of  Joseph  Cornwall  and  Char- 
lotte Carter.  He  was  baptized  July 
4,  1889,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
15,  1914,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  13,  1927, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 


BRINTON,  David  Branson,  sen.. 
Bishop  of  the  Big  Cottonwood  Ward, 
Cottonwood  Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to 
1900,  was  born  Feb.  23, 1850,  in  Savan- 
nah, Mo.,  the  son  of  David  Brinton  and 
Harriet  W.  Dilworth.  He  came  to 
Utah  in  1850,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  27,  1877, 
by  Daniel  H.  Wells. 

BRINTON,     David     Branson,     jun.. 

Bishop  of  the  Murray  1st  Ward,  Cot- 
tonwood Stake,  Utah,  from  1914  to 
1926,  was  born  Feb.  9,  1882,  in  Big 
Cottonwood,  the  son  of  David  B.  Brin- 
ton and  Susan  Huffaker.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  7,  1890,  ordained  an  Elder 
June  25,  1907,  by  Ensign  Woodruff, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1907-1909.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  27,  1914,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

CAHOON,  Andrew,  Bishop  of  the 
South  Cottonwood  Wai-d,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1854  to  1871,  was 
born  Aug.  4,  1824,  at  Harper's  Field, 
Ohio,  the  son  of  Reynolds  and  Thirza 
Cahoon.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  14,  1854.  He 
died  Dec.  13,  1900. 

CASTO,  Santa  Anna,  Bishop  of  the 
Big    Cottonwood    Ward,    Cottonwood 


CORNWALL,      Joseph      Alexander, 

Bishop  of  the  Winder  Ward,  Cotton- 
wood Stake,  Utah,  from  1904  to  1924, 
was  born  Oct.  4,  1863,  in  Mill  Creek, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Cornwall  and 
Charlotte  Carter.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1896-1899 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  31, 
1904. 

CUTLER,  Ralph,  first  counselor  in 
the  Cottonwood  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930,  was  born  Dec. 
13,  1873,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  the  son 
of  John  Cutler  and  Sarah  Atkinson. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  28,  1881,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1889-1890.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  12,  1922,  by  Uriah  G. 
Miller,  and  on  Nov.  20,  1927,  he  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  in  the  Stake 
presidency. 

DIMOND,  Walter  Abram,  Bishop  of 
the  Bennion  Ward,  Cottonwood  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1914  to  1919,  was  born 
July  18,  1872,  in  Crewkerne,  Somerset- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  Henry  Di- 
mond  and  Elizabeth  Jane  Webber.  He 
was  baptized  March  22,  1889,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1905  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Dec.  27,  1914,  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. 


444 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


EREKSON,   James  Theodore,   jun., 

Bishop  of  the  South  Cottonwood  Ward, 
Cottonwood  Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  2,  1894,  at 
South  Cottonwood,  Salt  Lake  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  James  Theodore 
Erekson  and  Janet  B.  McMillan.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  8,  1903,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1915- 
1917,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
20,  1927,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a 
Bishop  Jan.  6,  1929. 

EREKSON,  William  Benbow,  Bish- 
op of  the  South  Cottonwood  Ward, 
Cottonwood  Stake,  Utah,  from  1904  to 
1914,  was  born  Jan.  17,  1879,  in  South 
Cottonwood,  the  son  of  Jonas  Erekson 
and  Isabella  M.  Benbow.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  New  Zealand  in  1899-1902, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Feb.  21,  1904,  by  John  R.  Win- 
der. 

IVINS,  Heber  Grant,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Cottonwood  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1927  to  1929,  was 
born  Sept.  2,  1889,  in  St.  George,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Anthony  W.  Ivins  and  Eli- 
zabeth Snow.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission  to 
Japan  in  1910-1915,  and  was  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  in  the  Cottonwood 
Stake  presidency  Nov.  20,  1927. 

JENSON,  Nils  Lorenzo,  Bishop  of 
the  Grant  Ward,  Cottonwood  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930,  was  born 
April  10,  1887,  in  West  Jordan,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Nils  Jenson  and  Maria 
Johnson.  He  was  baptized  July  10, 
1895,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Mar. 
12,  1922,  by  Wm.  B.  Erekson,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Nov.  16,  1924,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith,  jun. 

JOHNSON,  Joel  Hills,  Bishop  of  the 
Mill  Creek  Ward,  Cottonwood  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1849  to  1851,  was  born  in 
Grafton,  Mass.,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  April  8,  1849.  He  died  Sept. 
24,  1882. 


LABRUM,  Thomas  Orren,  Bishop  oi 
the  Bennion  Ward,  Cottonwood  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930  -f ,  was  born 
Jan.  15,  1884,  in  South  Cottonwood,  the 
son  of  John  G.  Labrum  and  Ann  Eliza- 
beth Wheeler.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
2,  1892,  ordained  an  Elder  June  4, 
1906,  by  H.  T.  Godfrey,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  New  Zealand  in  1906-1909. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
22,  1919,  by  James  E.  Talmage,  and  a 
Bishop  Feb.  20,  1928,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

LEE,  Ezekiel  (Dr.),  Bishop  of  the 
Big  Cottonwood  Ward,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1851  to  1856,  was 
born  in  Chestei'field,  Massachusetts, 
the  son  of  Captain  Charles  Lee.  In 
1843  he  embraced  the  Gospel,  and  was 
appointed  president  of  the  Comstock 
Branch,  Michigan.  He  came  to  Utah 
in  1848.    He  died  June  12,  1877. 

LINDSAY,  Samuel  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Taylorsville  Ward,  Cottonwood  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1930,  was  born 
June  28,  1881,  in  Taylorsville,  the  son 
of  Joseph  S.  Lindsay  and  Emma  Ben- 
nion. He  was  baptized  July  4,  1889, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1905-1907,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  13,  1914,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  2,  1921,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard.  He  died  Jan.  20, 
1932. 

MAUSS,  Michael,  Bishop  of  the 
Murray  1st  Ward,  Cottonwood  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1909  to  1914,  was  born  Nov. 
2,  1871,  in  Papillion,  Sarpy  Co.,  Neb., 
the  son  of  Jacob  Mauss  and  Lena 
Kelsch.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  15, 
1888,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States  in  1897-1899.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  28,  1900,  by 
Heber  J.  Gi-ant,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  28, 
1909,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

MOSS,  James  Edward,  Bishop  of 
the  Holladay  Ward,  Cottonwood  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
Sept.  4,  1875,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


446 


son  of  Thomas  Moss  and  Fanny  Good- 
man. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  1915,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a 
Bishop  Sept.  4,  1927,  by  Geo.  Albert 
Smith. 

MOYLE,  Henry  Dinwoodey,  presi- 
dent of  the  Cottonwood  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1927  to  1930 -1-,  was  born  April 
22,  1889,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  the  son 
of  James  H.  Moyle  and  Alice  Din- 
woodey. He  was  baptized  July  3, 
1897,  ordained  an  Elder  June  21,  1909, 
by  his  fathei',  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Switzerland  and  Germany  in  1909- 
1912.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  21, 1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  and 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  Stake 
Nov.  21,  1927. 

NELSON,  Irvin  Theodore,  Bishop 
of  the  Brinton  (Cottonwood)  Ward, 
Cottonwood  Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1929,  was  born  April  17,  1892,  in  Mil- 
ton, Utah,  the  son  of  Waldemar  Theo- 
dore Nelson  and  Mary  Jensen.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  4,  1900,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Dec.  1,  1912,  by  Brigham  H. 
Robei'ts,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1919-1920.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  20,  1928,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

NYGREN,  Evald  Edmund,  Bishop  of 
the  Murray  2nd  Ward,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1928,  was 
born  Nov.  16,  1885,  in  Sweden,  the  son 
of  Frederick  B.  Nygren  and  Emma 
Anderson.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1922-1924,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  16,  1924,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

QUIST,  Joseph  Franklin,  Bishop  of 
the  Holladay  Ward,  Cottonwood  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1927,  was  born 
Dec.  13, 1882,  in  Big  Cottonwood,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  Anderson  Quist  and 
Mary  Hendeen.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia  in  1902-1905,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
17,  1921,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 


RASMUSSEN,     Raymond     Roscoe, 

Bishop  of  the  Murray  2nd  Ward,  Cot- 
tonwood Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1930  + ,  was  born  July  2,  1894,  at  Mem- 
bres,  New  Mexico,  the  son  of  Joseph 
E.  Rasmussen  and  Sarah  Poulsen.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  4, 
1927,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith,  and  a 
Bishop  Feb.  20,  1928,  by  Or.son  F. 
Whitney. 

RAWLINS,  Joseph  Sharp,  Bishop  of 
the  South  Cottonwood  Ward,  Cotton- 
wood Stake,  Utah,  from  1871  to  1900, 
was  born  April  9,  1823,  near  Carlton, 
Greene  Co.,  Illinois,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Rawlins  and  Jane  Sharp.  He  came  to 
Utah  in  1848,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  6,  1872. 

RYNEARSON,  Edward  M.,  Bishop 
of  the  Mill  Creek  Ward,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1927,  was 
born  Jan.  25,  1886,  in  Mill  Creek,  the 
son  of  A.  M.  Rynearson  and  Emma 
Redman.  He  was  baptized  June  7, 
1894,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
22,  1914,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  13,  1916, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

SANDERS,  Orson,  Bishop  of  the 
South  Cottonwood  Ward,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1900  to  1904,  was 
born  in  South  Cottonwood,  the  son  of 
Sondra  Sanders  and  Annie  Jorgensen. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Oct.  28,  1900,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

TOWLER,  Richard  Cornelius,  Bish- 
op of  the  Mill  Creek  Ward,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1914  to  1916,  was 
born  Sept.  5,  1880,  in  Mill  Creek,  the 
son  of  Daniel  Towler  and  Sarah  Ann 
Dunford.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  22,  1914. 

TURNER,  Amos  Howarth,  Bishop 
of  the  South  Cottonwood  Ward,  Cot- 
tonwood Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to 
1929,  was  born  Oct.  23,  1876,  in  South 


446 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Cottonwood,  the  son  of  William  K. 
Turner  and  Jane  Howarth.  He  was 
baptized  July  12,  1885,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Sept.  5,  1900,  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball, and  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Bri- 
tain in  1900-1902.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  20,  1927, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

WHEELER,  Jesse  Hyrum,  Bishop 
of  the  South  Cottonwood  Ward,  Cot- 
tonwood Stake,  Utah,  from  1914  to 
1927,  was  born  Sept.  14,  1868,  in  South 
Cottonwood,  the  son  of  Thomas  A. 
Wheeler  and  Ann  Walker.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  5,  1877,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty May  15,  1896,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1896- 
1898.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  28,  1900,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund,  and 
a  Bishop  Dec.  6,  1914,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 

YOUNG,  Don  Carlos,  jun..  Bishop 
of  the  Winder  Ward,  Cottonwood 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Aug.  5,  1882,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Don  Carlos 
Young  and  Alice  Naomi  Dowden.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1890,  ordained 
an  Elder  in  June,  1909,  filled  a  mission 
to  Germany  in  1909-1911,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
16,  1924,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

YOUNG,  William  (Joodall,  Bishop 
of  the  Big  Cottonwood  Ward,  Cotton- 
wood Stake,  Utah,  from  1874  to  1877, 
was  born  Feb.  21,  1827,  in  Ontario  Co., 
New  York,  the  son  of  Lorenzo  D. 
Young  and  Persis  Goodall.  He  was 
chosen  as  a  Bishop  Aug.  2,  1874.  He 
died  Dec.  26,  1883. 


Curlew   Stake 


ANDERSON,  Lars,  Bishop  of  the 
Black  Pine  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1924  to  1928,  was  born  Aug. 
23,  1877,  in  Mora  Noret,  Delarne,  Kop- 
perbergs  Ian,  Sweden,  a  son  of  Hans 


Anderson  and  Anna  Hanson.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1891,  was  baptized 
Nov.  5,  1891,  ordained  an  Elder  March 
2,  1901,  by  Charles  Call,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Sweden  in  1907-1910,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  19,  1924,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

BAKER,  Ira,  Bishop  of  the  Holbrook 
Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1909  to  1915,  was  born  Feb.  28,  1874, 
in  Metz,  Marion  Co.,  West  Virginia, 
a  son  of  Wm.  D.  Baker  and  Emmeline 
Kendall.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  6, 
1888,  by  Heber  Bennion,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1895- 
1898,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Ed- 
ward Stevenson  May  31,  1894,  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Dec.  19,  1909,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  was  set  apart  as  second 
counselor,  in  the  Cui'lew  Stake  presi- 
dency in  1922;  served  in  that  capacity 
until  1924. 

BENSON,  Joseph,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Summit  Branch,  Curlew  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1913  to  1915,  and  Bishop 
of  the  Summit  Ward  from  1915  to 
1924,  was  born  July  13,  1866,  at  Lo- 
gan, Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Ezra 
T.  Benson,  and  Mary  Knight.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old 
by  Eli  Bell,  sen.,  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  Ger- 
many by  Seymour  B.  Young  Sept.  30, 
1902.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Hyrum  G.  Smilh  in  May,  1916. 

BOWEN,  David  John,  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Arbon  Branch,  Curlew 
Stake,  from  1900  to  1907,  Bishop  of 
the  Arbon  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1916  to  1923,  was  born  Dec.  5, 
1861,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  David  Bowen  and  Annie  Shackle- 
ton,  He  was  baptized  June  10,  1870, 
by  Lewis  W.  Jones,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  5,  1917, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

BURTON,  Ira  Junius,  Bishop  of  the 
Park  Valley  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Utah,   from    1923  to   1928,  was   born 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


447 


April  19,  1897,  in  Park  Valley,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Joseph  H.  Burton  and  Mar- 
tha Mecham.  He  was  baptized  June 
10,  1905,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  28,  1923,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

COTTLE,  Walter,  Bishop  of  the 
Black  Pine  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1913  to  1920,  was  born  Oct. 
1,  1884,  in  Plain  City,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  H.  Cottle  and 
Elizabeth  S.  Dummer.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  12,  1893,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  27,  1911,  by  F.  W.  Strat- 
ford, and  a  Bishop  Nov.  23,  1913,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

CUTLER,  Jonathan  Corkins,  presi- 
dent of  the  Curlew  Stake,  in  Utah  and 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1922,  was  born 
Sept.  14,  1864,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Sheldon  Bealy  Cutler  and 
Sarah  Wight.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
27,  1872,  filled  a  mission  in  the  North- 
ern States  in  1898-19"00,  acted  as 
Bishop  of  the  Snowville  Ward  from 
1905  to  1915,  and  was  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  Curlew  Stake  May 
17,  1915,  by  Rudger  Clawson.  He  died 
June  22,  1922. 

CUTLER,  Joseph  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Snowville  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1915  to  1927,  was  born  Feb.  25, 
1884,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Jonathan  C.  Cutler  and  Rebecca 
Nilson.  He  was  baptized  May  5,  1892, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op May  17,  1915,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

DAVIS,  Edward  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Arbon  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1914  to  1916,  was  born  April 
4,  1873,  in  Samaria,  Oneida  Co.,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  David  R.  Davis  and  Elizabeth 
Griffiths.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  17,  1914,  by 
George  Albert  Smith. 

EVANS,  Lorenzo  Bowen,  Bishop  of 
the  Arbon  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Idaho, 


from  1923  to  1924,  was  born  March 
24,  1868,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Jonah  Evans  and  Frances  Bowen. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  5, 
1917,  by  John  C.  Cutler,  and  a  Bishop 
July  29,  1923,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

HALL,  Archibald  Sanford,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Mount  View  Branch,  Cur- 
lew Stake,  Utah,  from  1913  to  1915, 
and  Bishop  of  the  Mount  View  Ward, 
from  1915  to  1924,  was  born  Feb.  14, 
1886,  in  St.  Johns,  Apache  Co.,  Ari- 
zona, a  son  of  Mark  Hall,  jun.,  and 
Phebe  A.  Elder.  He  was  baptized  June 
7,  1894,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  14,  1915,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

HIRSCHI,  David,  counselor  in  the 
Curlew  Stake,  Utah  and  Idaho,  fi-om 
1920  to  1922,  was  born  June  11,  1868, 
in  Tooele,  Utah,  a  son  of  Christian 
Hirschi  and  Annie  Elizabeth  Bei'ger. 
He  was  baptized  May  10,  1885,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  May  12,  1891,  by  J. 
Campbell,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1909-1910.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  5,  1910, 
by  L.  A.  Snow,  ordained  Bishop  of 
Park  Valley  Ward  Aug.  31,  1913,  and 
was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  in 
the  Curlew  Stake  presidency  May  2, 
1920,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

HIRSCHI,  Fred  Jacob,  Bishop  of 
the  Rosette  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  21,  1883,  in  Rosette,  Box  Elder 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Christian  Hirschi 
and  Anna  Bei'ger.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  16,  1883,  by  William  H.  Mecham, 
ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  7,  1908,  by 
Joseph  Eli  Jensen,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1909,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Heber  J. 
Grant  May  29,  1910,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  April  22,  1928,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

HIRSCHI,  Louis  Arnold,  Bishop  of 
the  Park  Valley  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 


448 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  in  1930  +  ,  was  born  Nov.  17, 
1896,  in  Park  Valley,  Utah,  a  son  of 
David  Hirschi  and  Mary  Zaugg.  He 
was  baptized  June  30,  1906,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Sept.  4,  1920,  by  Jona- 
than C.  Cutler,  and  a  Bishop  April  20, 
1930,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HOLBROOK,  Heber  Angell.  Bish- 
op of  the  Holbi-ook  Ward,  Curlew 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1902  to  1909,  was 
born  June  5,  1867,  in  Bountiful,  Davis 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  Holbrook 
and  Caroline  Frances  Angell.  He  was 
baptized  June  5,  1875,  and  was  sus- 
tained as  a  Bishop  Oct.  26,  1902.  He 
died  Dec.  29,  1931. 

HUNSAKER,  Alma  Loren,  Bishop 
of  the  Holbrook  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930,  was  born 
May  15,  1892,  in  Honeyville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Robert  S.  Hunsaker  and  Min- 
nie M.  Wheatley.  He  was  baptized 
May  15,  1900,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  19,  1925,  by  Rudger  Clawson, 
and  ordained  Bishop  of  Holbrook 
Ward,  July  17,  1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

KING,  William  Fames,  Bishop  of 
the  Mount  View  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  25,  1884,  in  Logan,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  King  and  Clara 
Ann  Fames.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
5,  1893,  by  John  Crawther,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  13,  1915,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
April  24,  1924,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

KUNZLER,  Jacob,  Bishop  of  the 
Rosette  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1910  to  1913,  was  born  March 
13,  1851,  in  St.  Margrethen,  Switzer- 
land, a  son  of  Jacob  and  Mary  Kunz- 
ler.  He  was  baptized  March  18,  1880, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  May  29,  1910, 
by  Heber  J.   Grant. 

LARKIN,  Joseph  James,  president 
of   the    Curlew    Stake,    (Utah-Idaho) 


from  1922  to  1924,  was  born  Oct.  5, 
1869,  in  Ogden,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Joseph  Larkin  and  Harriet 
Chatterly.  He  was  baptized  June  27, 
1878,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  25, 
1896,  by  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1896-1899.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  13,  1905,  by  Oleen  N. 
Stohl. 

MECHAM,  Erastus  Darwin,  Bishop 
of  the  Park  Valley  Ward,  Curlew 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1879  to  1892,  was 
born  July  20,  1826,  in  Hopkinton,  St. 
Lawrence  Co.,  New  York.  He  was 
baptized  in  January,  1838,  served  as 
a  member  of  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  July  17,  1879. 

MECHAM,  William  Henry,  Bishop 
of  the  Park  Valley  Ward,  Curlew 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1892  to  1899,  was 
born  Dec.  31,  1852,  in  Little  Cotton- 
wood, Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Erastus  D.  Mecham  and  Mai-tha  Jones. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  July  25,  1892,  by  Lorenzo 
Snow,  and  died  in  Logan  in  Febru- 
ary, 1922. 

NELSON,  David  George,  Bishop  of 
the  Snowville  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  bom 
Nov.  15,  1894,  in  Snowville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  David  Geoi'ge  Nelson  and  Mary 
Cottam.  He  was  baptized  in  August, 
1904,  by  John  Cottam,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  16, 
1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

NISH,  William  R.,  Bishop  of  the 
Park  Valley  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1923,  was  born 
Sept.  10,  1884,  in  Clarkston,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Malcom  Nish  and  Maria  J. 
Godfrey.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  10, 
1892,  ordained  a  Seventy  April  18, 
1911,  by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1911-1913, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1918, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


449 


by  David  O.  McKay  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Aug.  1,  1920,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

PALMER,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Stone  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1922  to  1928,  was  born  June  16, 
1887,  in  Southminster,  Essex,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  James  Watts  Palmer 
and  Elizabeth  E.  Miller.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  his  father,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1889,  was  ordained  an  El- 
der, filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1908-1910,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  6,  1922,  by 
David  0.  McKay. 

PALMER,  James  Watts,  Bishop  of 
the  Pine  Valley  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1899  to  1913,  was  born 
July  14,  1859,  in  England,  a  son  of 
John  Palmer  and  Margaret  Watts.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  26,  1882,  by  Eph- 
raim  H.  Nye  in  England,  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1889,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1913,  and  acted  as  a  Bishop's 
counselor.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Nov.  20,  1899,  by  John  Henry  Smith, 
and  died  Nov.  5,  1919,  in  Burley,  Idaho. 

PECK,  Leo,  Bishop  of  the  Holbrook 
Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1914 
to  1919,  was  born  June  28,  1875,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam Peck  and  Olive  Jenny.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
was  ordained  a  Seventy,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  California,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  17, 
1915,  by  David   O.   McKay. 

PETERSEN,  Andrew  P.,  Bishop  of 
the  Stone  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1917  to  1922,  was  born  Dec.  23, 
1880,  in  Slagelse,  Denmark,  a  son  of 
Niels  A.  Petersen  and  Johanne  Lar- 
son. He  was  baptized  Sept.  1,  1889, 
by  Joseph  M.  Smith,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  5,  1917, 
by  George  D.  Smith. 

ROE,    Thomas    William,    presiding 
Elder  of   the    Stone    Branch,    Curlew 


Stake,  from  1900-1902  and  Bishop  of 
the  Stone  Ward  from  1902  to  1915, 
was  born  March  31,  1869,  in  Derby, 
Derbyshire,  England,  a  son  of 
John  Roe  and  Catherine  Byatt.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  15,  1882,  by  John 
Sutton,  emigrated  to  Utah,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug. 
25,  1902,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and 
chosen  second  counselor  in  the  presi- 
dency of  the  Curlew  Stake  in  1915. 
He  died  April  5,  1920. 

SEELY,  Arta  McClain,  Bishop  of 
the  Rosette  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1913  to  1928,  was  born 
Nov.  3,  1874,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Isaac  J.  Seely  and  Elizabeth 
Jane  Fisher.  He  was  baptized  June 
17,  1883,  by  John  B.  Fagg,  ordained 
a  Seventy  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1897-1898,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  31,  1913,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

SORENSEN,    A  m  m  o  n    Ambrose, 

Bishop  of  the  Summit  Ward,  Curlew 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930,  was 
born  Dec.  26,  1883,  in  Mendon,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jacob  F.  Sorensen 
and  Susan  Hancock.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  21,  1892,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  7,  1916,  by  Joseph  J.  Lar- 
kin,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  18, 
1925,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

SMITH,  Willard  Richards,  first 
counselor  in  the  Curlew  Stake  presi- 
dency from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  31,  1872,  in  Farmington,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Lot  Smith  and  Alice  Ann 
Richards.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  3, 
1880,  by  his  father,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  19,  1924,  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

SWEETEN,  Warren  Hugh,  Bishop 
of  the  Holbrook  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1922  to  1927,  was  born 
April  10,  1883,  in  Mendon,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Robert  Sweeten  and  Amanda 
Hagle.  He  was  baptized  July  5,  1891, 
ordained  an   Elder  Sept.   2,   1904,  by 


Vol.  IV.  No.   29 


July   18,   1936 


450 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


George  Romning,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1904-1905,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  18,  1909, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bishop 
April  29,  1923,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

TOYN,  Thomas  S.,  Bishop  of  the 
Arbon  Ward,  Curlew  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1924  to  1925,  was  born  Feb.  12, 
1882,  in  Grouse  Creek,  Utah,  a  son 
of  David  H.  Toyn  and  Martha  Jane 
Davis.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  15,  1891, 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  14,  1901,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  28,  1923,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage,  and  sustained  as  a  Bishop  in 
1924. 

WADDOUPS,  William  W.,  Bishop 
of  the  Juniper  Ward,  Curlew  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  27,  1870,  in  Bountiful,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  Waddoups  and 
Martha  Page.  He  was  baptized  July 
27,  1877,  by  his  father,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  7,  1916, 
by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 


Deseret  Stake 


ANDERSON,  John  Lee,  Bishop  of 
the  Oak  Creek  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1911  to  1930,  was  born 
May  30,  1876,  in  Oak  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Peter  Anderson  and  Martha 
Ann  Lovell.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
29,  1884,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
12,  1907,  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a 
Bishop  May  14,  1911,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

ANDERSON,    Norman    Stillwell, 

Bishop  of  the  Sugarville  Ward,  Des- 
eret Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1920, 
was  born  Aug.  3,  1888,  in  Lehi,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Brigham  G.  Anderson  and 
Rachel  Woodhouse.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  1,  1896,  ordained  an  Elder  July 
4,  1909,  by  John  Woodhouse,  filled  a 
mission    to    the    Northern    States    in 


1910-1912,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  6,  1919,  by  Or- 
son F.  Whitney.  He  died  Feb.  20, 
1920. 

ASHBY,  Rodney  Badger,  Bishop  of 
the  Leamington  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1900  to  1920,  was  born 
Oct.  26,  1872,  in  Holden,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Wm.  H.  Ashby  and  Nancy  M. 
Badger.  He  was  baptized  May  22, 
1881,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1895-1898,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  15, 
1900,  by  Fi'ancis  M.  Lyman. 

BLACK,  Joseph  Smith,  Bishop  of 
the  Deseret  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1891,  was  born 
July  14,  1836,  at  Lisburn,  Antrim  Co., 
Ireland.  He  came  to  America  in  1840 
with  his  father,  was  baptized  in  June, 
1844,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  July  24, 
1877,  by  Erastus  Snow.  He  died  Aug. 
13,  1910. 

CAHOON,  Hyrum  Spencer,  Bishop 
of  the  Deseret  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1903  to  1908,  was  born 
Nov.  24,  1853,  in  Murray,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Daniel  S.  Cahoon  and  Jane 
Amanda  Spencer.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  23, 
1903,  by  George  Teasdale. 

CHRISTENSEN,     Lorenzo     Henry, 

Bishop  of  the  Delta  3rd  Ward,  Deser- 
et Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Jan.  2,  1887,  in  Oak  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Anton  Christensen 
and  Castina  Lovell.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  1,  1895,  filled  two  home  missions 
in  Millard  Stake,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  22,  1924,  by  Alonzo  A. 
Hinckley,  and  a  Bishop  Mai'ch  24, 
1929,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

DAMRON,  Joseph  W.,  jun..  Bishop 
of  the  Deseret  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1909  to  1925,  was  born 
June  9,  1866,  at  Petersburg,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  W.  Damron  and  Mar- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


451 


garet  P.  Freeman.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  Samoa  in  1891-1892,  and  to  the  So- 
ciety Islands  in  1892-1895,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  3,  1908,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

DUTSON,  Willis  Eddy,  Bishop  of 
Oak  City  Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  28,  1897,  in 
Oak  City,  Millard  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Eddy  Quayle  Dutson  and  Annie  B. 
Anderson.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1924-1926,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  a  Bishop  March  23, 
1930. 

FULLMER,  John  Wesley,  Bishop 
of  the  Abraham  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1918  to  1927,  was  born 
July  5,  1890,  in  Mound  Valley,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  Oscar  M.  Fullmer  and  Har- 
riet P.  Williams.  He  was  baptized 
July  5,  1898,  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia in  1911-1913,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  19,  1915,  by  Alonzo 
A.  Hinckley,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  22,  1918,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

FULLMER,  Oscar  Myron,  Bishop 
of  the  Abraham  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1903  to  1907,  was  born 
Sept.  13,  1852,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Alma  L.  Fullmer  and 
Sarah  Ann  Follett.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1881- 
1883,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb. 
23,  1903,  by  Orrin  P.  Miller.  He  died 
Jan.  25,  1934. 

GARDNER,  Edward  Eugene,  Bish- 
op of  the  Delta  1st  Ward,  Deseret 
Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 -h,  was  born  July 
18,  1888,  at  Salem,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Wm.  Heber  Gardner  and  Mary  Ar- 
temesia  Higgins.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  Tasmania  and  Australia  in  1921- 
1923,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  23,  1924,  by  Alonzo  A.  Hinck- 
ley, and  a  Bishop  Sept.  28,  1930,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richai'ds. 


HOGAN,  Charles  Eric,  Bishop  of 
the  Abraham  Wai'd,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1914,  was  born 
Jan.  3,  1877,  in  South  Bountiful,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Eric  Hogan  and  Profinda 
Hatch.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  5,  1885, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  22,  1912,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

HOGAN,  Donald,  Bishop  of  the 
Abraham  Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1914  to  1918,  was  born  June  3, 
1883,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Eric  Hogan  and  Profinda  Hatch.  He 
was  baptized  June  28,  1891,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  22,  1914,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

HUNTER,  James  Austin,  Bishop  of 
the  Lynndyl  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1915  to  1918,  was  born 
May  20,  1885,  in  Grantsville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Edward  Hunter  and  Mar- 
tha Hyde.  He  filled  a  successful  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1907- 
1910,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  22,  1914,  by  James  E.  Talmage, 
and  a  Bishop  June  27,  1915,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant. 

HURST,  Albert  LeRoy,  Bishop  of 
the  Lynndyl  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1923,  was  born 
March  22,  1880,  in  Fairview,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Philip  Hurst  and  Rebecca 
A.  Sanderson.  He  was  baptized  June 
22,  1888,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
25,  1918,  by  Alonzo  A.  Hinckley,  and 
a  Bishop  June  29,  1919. 

JACOB,  Elmer  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Lynndyl  Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1918  to  1919,  was  born  Nov.  25, 
1883,  in  Daniels,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jo- 
seph Jacob  and  Ellen  Gerber.  He  was 
baptized,  in  1892,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  27,  1915,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith,  and  a  Bishop  June  23,  1918, 
by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

LANGSTON,       Jacob      Heathcote, 

Bishop  of  the  Lynndyl  Ward,  Deseret 


452 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1914  to  1915,  was 
born  Jan.  20,  1863,  in  Rockville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  Langston  and  Clarin- 
da  Phillips.  He  was  baptized  June 
25,  1871,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  10,  1892,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  a  Bishop  March  22,  1914,  by 
James  E.  Tahiiage. 

LEE,  LaFayette  Cox,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Deseret  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  31,  1894,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Milton  LaFayette  Lee  and 
Mary  Elizabeth  Cox.  He  was  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  Sept.  29,  1929, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

LYMAN,  Edward  Leo,  jun.,  Bish- 
op of  the  Delta  2nd  Ward,  Deseret 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1929,  was 
born  Feb.  19,  1881,  in  Fillmore,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Edward  Leo  Lyman  and 
Mary  Miranda  Callister.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  21,  1889,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  August,  1907,  and  a  Bishop 
March  22,  1924,  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

LYMAN,  Willis  Jay,  Bishop  of  the 
Delta  3rd  Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1928,  was  born  June  21, 
1891,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ed- 
ward Leo  Lyman  and  Mary  Miranda 
Callister.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  18, 
1899,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  22,  1924,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

MAXFIELD,  Hiett  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Delta  Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1909  to  1924,  was  born  Feb.  7, 
1859,  in  South  Cottonwood,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Elijah  H.  Maxfield  and  Helen 
A.  Tanner.  He  was  baptized  when 
nine  years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  30,  1887,  by  Albert  K.  Thurber, 
and  a  Bishop  Oct.  19,  1909,  by  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman. 

MILLER,  John  W.,  Bishop  of  the 
Sugarville  Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah, 


from  1920  to  1926,  was  born  Sept. 
25,  1864,  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  the 
son  of  John  W.  Miller  and  Elizabeth 
Ferguson.  He  came  to  Utah  with  his 
parents  in  1870,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  20, 
1920,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

MOODY,  Milton,  Bishop  of  the  Des- 
eret Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1891  to  1898,  was  born  Oct.  24,  1867, 
in  Little  Spring  Valley,  Lincoln  Co., 
Nevada,  the  son  of  William  C.  Moody 
and  Cynthia  Elizabeth  Dami'on.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  and  came  to  Deseret  when  he  was 
13  years  of  age.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1901-1902, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  in  March,  1890,  by  Anthon  H. 
Lund. 

NIELSEN,  Lars,  Bishop  of  the 
Leamington  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1883  to  1900,  was  born 
March  20,  1828,  in  South  Orslev,  Mari- 
bo  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Niels 
Christensen  and  Anna  M.  Rasmussen. 
He  was  baptized  March  30,  1860,  in 
Denmark,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1863, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  9,  1883,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 

NOBLE,  Monroe  Clarence,  Bishop 
of  the  Lynndyl  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1925,  was  born 
June  26,  1882,  in  Salina,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  W.  Noble  and  Mary- 
etta  Curtis.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  3, 
1890,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Western 
States  in  1914-1916,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  23, 
1923,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

PRATT,  Jonathan  Burgess,  Bishop 
of  the  Hinckley  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1920,  was  born 
June  28,  1869,  in  Duncan's  Retreat, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wm. 
H.  Pratt  and  Ann  Bui-gess.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  22,   1912,   by   Heber  J.   Grant. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


453 


PRATT,  William  Franklin,  Bishop 
of  the  Hinckley  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1902  to  1912,  was  born 
April  27,  1867,  in  Duncan,  Washing- 
ton Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  H. 
Pratt  and  Ann  Burgess.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  11,  1876,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1894-1896,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Feb.  24,  1902,  by  Mathias  F.  Cow- 
ley. 

PRATT,  William  Holbert,  Bishop 
of  the  Hinckley  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1891  to  1902,  was  born 
May  8,  1844,  in  Tessomingo  County, 
Mississippi,  the  son  of  Jonathan  B. 
Pratt  and  Susanna  Holbert.  He  was 
baptized  in  1857,  in  Grantsville,  Utah, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op March  21,  1891,  by  Anthon  H. 
Lund.   He  died  July  16,  1902. 

ROBERTS,  Walter,  Bishop  of  the 
Sutherland  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1921,  was  born 
June  23,  1876,  in  Annabella,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Edward  K.  Roberts  and 
Hannah  Gleave.  He  was  baptized 
June  23,  1884,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Sept.  1,  1900,  filled  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand  in  1900-1903,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec. 
23,  1917,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

SHIPLEY,  George  Dixon,  Bishop 
of  the  Sutherland  Ward,  Deseret 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1913  to  1917,  was 
born  March  28,  1872,  in  Ogden,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Thomas  Shipley  and  Mary 
Ann  Dixon.  He  was  baptized  July 
1,  1880,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  22,  1914,  by  James 
E.  Talmage. 

SKEEM,  Marcus,  Bishop  of  the 
Oasis  Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1908  to  1926,  was  born  Feb.  24, 
1877,  in  Skanderup,  Denmark,  the  son 
of  Hans  Peter  Skeem  and  Cecilie 
S Venning.    He  came  to  Utah  with  his 


parents  in  1880,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Nov.  1,  1908,  by  Francis  M, 
Lyman. 

STEPHENSON,    Anthony    Edward, 

Bishop  of  the  Delta  2nd  Ward,  Des- 
eret Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  24,  1879,  in  Holden, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Anthony  Stephenson 
and  Mary  Ann  Bennett.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  24,  1887,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug.  12,  1912,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun.,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  29, 
1929,   by   Melvin  J.   Ballard. 

STRATTON,  Charles  Abel,  Bishop 
of  the  Hinckley  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  24,  1874,  in  Virgin  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  Albert  Stratton  and 
Emma  Maria  Gardiner.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  March  21,  1920,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

STYLER,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Oa- 
sis Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1891  to  1908,  was  born  Feb.  28,  1855, 
in  Switzerland.  He  came  to  Utah  in 
1861,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1883-1884,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  21, 
1891,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

TAYLOR,  James  Milton,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  South  Delta  Ward  or  Del- 
ta 3rd  Ward,  Deseret  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1918  to  1924,  was  born  May  10, 
1871,  in  Salem,  Utah,  the  son  of  James 
Allen  Taylor  and  Louisa  Jane  Tay- 
lor. He  was  baptized  Feb.  19,  1883, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  18, 
1893,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  set 
apart  as  presiding  Elder  March  24, 
1918,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

WILCKEN,  George  Q.,  Bishop  of 
the  Abraham  Ward,  Deseret  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930,  was  born 
May  24,  1894,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the 
son    of   Charles    Henry   Wilcken   and 


454 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Haddie  V.  Carlisle.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  27, 
1927,   by   Orson   F,   Whitney. 


Duchesne  Stake 

AKELUND,  Lester  Eric,  Bishop  of 
the  Mountain  Home  Ward,  Duchesne 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1923,  was 
born  June  20,  1889,  in  Fremont,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Peter  Isak  Akelund  and  Mi- 
nerva E.  Zufelt.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  4,  1897,  filled  a  mission  to  Sa- 
moa in  1910-1914,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  15,  1917,  by  Anthony  W. 
Ivins,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  26,  1920,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

AKELUND,  Peter  Isaac,  Bishop  of 
the  Altonah  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1916  to  1924,  was  born 
July  17,  1858,  in  Ostersund,  Sweden, 
the  son  of  Eric  Isak  Eklund  and  Brita 
Pherson.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1869, 
was  baptized  in  1870,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1886-1888 
and  was  oi-dained  a  Bishop  Sept.  30, 
1916,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.  Bro. 
Akelund  acted  as  Bishop  of  Castle 
Dale  from  1907-1912. 

BENNION,  Owen,  president  of  the 
Duchesne  Stake  of  Zion,  Utah,  from 
1920  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  15, 
1869,  in  Long  Valley,  Lincoln  Co.,  Ne- 
vada, the  son  of  John  Bennion  and 
Esther  Ann  Birch.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  19,  1915,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards  and  presided  over  the  Alto- 
nah Ward  for  one  year.  He  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  Duchesne 
Stake  June  27,  1920,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

BILLINGS,  George  Victor,  first 
counselor  in  the  Duchesne  Stake  pres- 
idency from  1920  to  1930,  was  born 
Nov.  29,  1880,  in  Provo,  Utah 
the  son  of  Geo.  Pierce  Billings  and 
Lydia  Ann  Young.    He  was  baptized 


Sept.  4,  1890,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  29,  1910,  by  Nelson  Merkley,  and 
a  Bishop  Dec.  10,  1911,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney,  presided  as  Bishop  over  the 
Duchesne  Ward  from  1910  to  1914, 
and  was  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
in  the  Duchesne  Stake  presidency 
June  27,   1920,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

BURTON,  Austin  Garr,  Bishop  of 
the  Boneta  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1913  to  1916,  was  born 
Nov.  26,  1881,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Robert  T.  Burton  and  Sar- 
ah Ann  Garr.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
6,  1890,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1905-1906,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  in  the  spring  of  1913, 
by  Ephraim  Lambert,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  21,  1913,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

CANNON,  Ira  Bennion,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Duchesne  Stake  presiden- 
cy, Utah,  from  1919  to  1920,  was  born 
Feb.  11,  1889,  in  Taylorsville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Angus  M.  Cannon  and  Ma- 
ria Bennion.  He  was  baptized  July  4, 
1897,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  26, 
1913,  by  Nephi  L.  Morris,  and  a  Bish- 
op June  28,  1919,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. He  acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Mt. 
Emmons  Ward  until  June  27,  1920, 
when  he  was  chosen  as  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Duchesne  Stake  presiden- 
cy, and  was  set  apart  to  that  position 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

CASE,  Frederick  Earl,  Bishop  of 
the  Mt.  Emmons  Ward,  Duchesne 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1930,  was 
born  Dec.  12,  1884,  in  Spanish  Fork, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Fred  Aaron  Case  and 
Mary  Ann  Humble.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1906- 
1908,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept. 
23,  1916,  by  Jos.  F,  Smith,  jun.,  and 
a  Bishop  June  27,  1920,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

COX,  Edward  Eugene,  Bishop  of 
the   Boneta    Ward,    Duchesne    Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


455 


Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  18,  1877,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Wm.  Arthur  Cox  and  Mary  C. 
Anderson.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  2, 
1885,  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  27, 
1920,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bish- 
op Jan.  10,  1923,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

GILBERT,  Thomas  Martindale, 

Bishop  of  the  Arcadia  Ward,  Du- 
chesne Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  12,  1896,  at  Jo- 
seph, Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Leandrew  Jackson  Gilbert  and  Eliza 
Jane  Farnsworth.  He  was  baptized 
in  September,  1904,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  14, 
1923,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

GOODRICH,  Leslie  Bruce,  Bishop 
of  the  Bluebell  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  7,  1884,  in  Morgan  County,  Utah, 
the  son  of  George  Albert  Goodrich 
and  Aliza  Ann  Taggart.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  17,  1893,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  June  14,  1925, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

IVIE,  Clarence,  Bishop  of  the 
Strawberry  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
from  1918  to  1930,  was  born  Aug.  12, 
1887,  in  Riverdale,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Hyrum  L.  Ivie  and  Esther 
Robbins.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  18, 
1895,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  30,  1918,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant. 

JENSEN,  Albert  Swen,  Bishop  of 
the  Mountain  Home  Ward,  Duchesne 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1928,  was 
born  Dec.  9,  1875,  in  Peoa,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Ole  and  Annie  Jensen.  He  was 
baptized  May  8,  1884,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  26,  1920,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney,  and  a  Bishop  June  23,  1923, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

JONES,  James  Simpkins,  Bishop  of 
the    Tabiona   Wai'd,    Duchesne    Stake, 


Utah,  from  1911  to  1916,  was  born 
March  17,  1877,  in  Enoch,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  Lee  Jones  and  Rachel 
Simpkins.  He  was  baptized  May  3, 
1885,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  10,  1911,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

MERRILL,  William  Porter,  Bishop 
of  the  Bluebell  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  was  born  Aug.  30,  1869,  in  Para- 
dise, Utah,  the  son  of  Porter  William 
Merrill  and  Harriet  A.  Remington.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  6,  1877,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  10,  1911,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

MICHIE,   William    George,    Bishop 

of  the  Redcliff  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct,  19,  1875,  in  Salt  Lake  County, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Robert  Michie  and 
Frances  Potts.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Oct.  20,  1912,  by  William 
H.  Smart,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  28,  1925. 

MICKELSON,  James  Michael,  Bish- 
op of  the  Boneta  Ward,  Duchesne 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1920,  was 
born  May  11,  1881,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Jens  Mickelson  and  Ann  Chris- 
tina Anderson.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
4,  1889,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept. 
21,  1913,  by  William  H.  Smart,  and 
a  Bishop  Sept.  17,  1916,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

MOFFITT,  John  Clifton,  Bishop  of 
the  Boneta  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1923,  was  born 
June  10,  1896,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  W.  Moffitt  and  Evelyn 
Cox.  He  moved  with  his  parents  to 
Boneta  in  1907,  filled  a  mission  to 
California  in  1916-1918,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  29,  1919,  by  David 
A.  Smith,  and  a  Bishop  June  27,  1920, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

MOON,  Heber,  Bishop  of  the  Red- 
cliff    Ward,    Duchesne    Stake,    Utah, 


456 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


from  1918  to  1925,  was  born  Jan.  8, 
1883,  in  Woodland,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Henry  Moon  and  Mary  Ann  Thayne. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  the  Western 
States  in  1903-1905,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  30, 
1918,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

MURPHY,  Emanuel  B.,  Bishop  of 
the  Upalco  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  14,  1854,  in  Weakly,  Tennessee, 
the  son  of  Emanuel  B.  Murphy  and 
Mary  Easters.  He  was  baptized  in 
1862,  ordained  a  High  Priest,  June 
7,  1903,  by  George  M.  Young,  and 
(already  a  Bishop)  set  apart  Sept. 
15,  1917,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

MUSSER,      Frederick     Seegmiller, 

Bishop  of  the  Midview  Ward,  Du- 
chesne Stake,  Utah,  from  1913  to  1915, 
was  born  Oct.  1,  1878,  in  Lake  View, 
Utah,  the  son  of  A.  Milton  Musser 
and  Annie  Seegmiller.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  10,  1886,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  21, 
1913,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

ROWLEY,  John  Emerson,  Bishop 
of  the  Mountain  Home  Ward,  Du- 
chesne Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1929, 
was  born  Sept.  28,  1892,  in  Meadow, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  T.  Rowley  and 
Lucy  M.  Golding.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  3,  1903,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  18,  1927,  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay, and  a  Bishop  May  6,  1928,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

RUST,  LeRoy  W.,  Bishop  of  Mt. 
Emmons  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake,  Utah, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  May  15,  1879,  in 
Burrville,  Utah,  the  son  of  Geo.  S. 
Rust  and  Eliza  Brown.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  August,  1888,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Sept.  21,  1913,  by 
James  E.  Talmage,  and  a  Bishop  Feb. 
9,  1930. 

SHELTON,  Francis  Marion,  Bish- 
op of  the  Duchesne  Ward,  Duchesne 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1922,  was 
born  Aug.  22,  1882,  in  Heber,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Charles  Shelton  and  Susan 
Jane  Wilkins.  He  was  baptized  about 
August,  1891,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  26,  1920, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

SMITH,  Charles  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Midview  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 -i-,  was  born  Feb.  9, 
1870,  in  Midway,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Benjamin  Mark  Smith  and  Elizabeth 
Agnes  Wood.  He  was  baptized  March 
30,  1879,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  James  E.  Talmage,  and  a  Bishop 
Jan.  5,  1930. 

SOLOMONSON,     Solomon     0 11  n, 

Bishop  of  the  Arcadia  Ward,  Du- 
chesne Stake,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1923, 
was  born  Aug.  3,  1877,  at  Norre  Hald, 
Aalborg  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Johan  Erik  Solomonsen  and  Else 
Christensen.  He  came  to  Utah  in 
1888,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  19,  1915,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards, 
and  a  Bishop  Sept.  15,  1917,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

WAGSTAFF,  Alma  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  Tabiona  W^ard,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1916  to  1920,  was  born 
Sept.  18,  1862,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  the 
son  of  William  Wagstaff  and  Emily 
Limb.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  23,  1916,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

WHITE,  Levi  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Utahn  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1918  to  1922,  was  born 
March  5,  1868,  in  St.  Joseph,  Nevada, 
the  son  of  John  Chambers  White  and 
Mary  Ann  Ingham.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  1,  1896, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop 
June  30,  1918. 

WILKINS,  Oscar,  Bishop  of  the 
Mountain      Home      Ward,      Duchesne 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


457 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1913  to  1920,  was 
born  Feb.  14,  1851,  in  Tetberry,  Glou- 
cestershire, England,  the  son  of 
George  Wilkins  and  Hannah  Stone- 
ham.  He  was  baptized  in  April,  1864, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  5,  1901, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  10,  1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
He  had  acted  as  Bishop  of  Boneta 
Ward  from  1910  to  1913.  He  died 
Aug.  7,  1921. 

WILKINS,  Reuben  Ralph,  Bishop 
of  the  Mountain  Home  Ward,  Du- 
chesne Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930,  was  born  Aug.  28,  1890,  in  Peoa, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Oscar  Wilkins  and 
Elizabeth  Durrah.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  17,  1899,  ordained  a  High  Pi-iest 
March  20,  1926,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith, 
and  a  Bishop  May  11,  1929,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 


East  Jordan   Stake 

BECKSTEAD,  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Midvale  2nd  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Dec.  18,  1892,  in  South  Jor- 
dan, Utah,  a  son  of  Byrum  H.  Beck- 
stead  and  Anna  Jane  Holt.  He  was 
baptized  Dec.  28,  1901,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty in  1910,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1916-1918,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  8,  1927,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop 
on  July  15,  1928,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

DESPAIN,  Alvin  Augustus,  Bishop 
of  the  Granite  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1918  to  1920,  was 
born  Feb.  22,  1877,  in  Granite,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  Jos- 
eph Despain  and  Sarah  C.  Egbert.  He 
was  baptized  in  May,  1885,  oi'dained 
to  the  Priesthood  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1911-1912, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  19,  1917,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 


DRAPER,  William,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Draper  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1852  to  1856,  was 
born  Nov.  25,  1818,  in  Easterton, 
Wilts,  England,  a  son  of  William 
Draper  and  Lydia  Lathrop.  He  came 
to  Utah  in  1852,  and  bore  the  title  of 
Bishop,  he  having  acted  as  Bishop  on 
the  frontiers  before  his  arrival  in  the 
Valley.     He  died  June  29,  1898. 

ENNISS,-  Willard  Boulter,  Bishop 
of  the  Draper  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1898  to  1910,  was 
born  June  8,  1857,  in  Draper,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Enniss 
and  Elizabeth  Boulter.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  24,  1886,  ordained  an  Elder, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1906-1908,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  21,  1898,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith. 

GREENWOOD,      Thomas      Foster, 

Bishop  of  the  East  Midvale  Ward, 
East  Jordan  Stake,  Utah,  from  1920 
to  1930,  was  born  April  5,  1873,  in 
Union,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Thomas  Greenwood  and  Ann  Henri- 
etta Parry.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
10,  1881,  ordained  a  Seventy  in  August, 
1907,  by  David  Archibald,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1908-1911, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Feb.  13,  1921,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

HARRISON,  Isaac,  presiding  Elder 
at  Sandy,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  (now 
in  the  East  Jordan  Stake),  from 
1872  to  1873,  was  born  Nov.  2,  1815, 
in  Columbian  Co.,  Ohio,  was  baptized 
April  18,  1837,  by  Micha  C.  Melton, 
and  came  to  Utah  in  1858,  having 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Mormon 
Battalion.  He  was  a  somewhat  self- 
appointed  presiding  Elder,  but  labored 
under  the  direction  of  the  South  Cot- 
tonwood Ward.  He  died  March  2, 
1894. 

HAWKINS,  Riego  Stay,  Bishop  of 
the  Granite  Ward,  East  Jordan  Stake, 


458 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  from  1!)29  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  30,  1879,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Riego  Hawkins  and  Charlotte 
E.  Stay.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  30, 
1887,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southei-n  States 
in  1898-1900,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  7,  1926,  by  Heber  J.  Grant, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  8,  1928, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

JENSEN,  James  Ernest,  Bishop  of 
the  Sandy  3rd  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  18,  1886,  in  Juab,  Juab  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Carl  Jensen  and  Chris- 
tine Petersen.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
3,  1894,  ordained  an  Elder  June  24, 
1906,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1906-1908,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  13,  1921,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May 
8,  1926,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

JENSEN,  James  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Sandy  2nd  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Dec.  9,  1881,  in  Draper,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Jens  Peter  Jensen  and  Ann 
Petersen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  17, 
1890,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1902-1904,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  12,  1920. 

MILNE,  Charles  Lindsay  Mounteer, 

Bishop  of  the  Union  Ward,  East  Jor- 
dan Stake,  Utah,  from  1910  to  1918, 
was  born  June  3,  1871,  in  Woodhouse, 
Normanton,  Yorkshire,  England,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  with  his  parents  in 
1873,  was  baptized  June  6,  1880,  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1902-1904,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Nov.  20,  1910,  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. 

MORRIS,  Arthur  Charles,  Bishop 
of  the  Cresent  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1924,  was 


born  April  16,  1873,  in  London,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  William  Vitler  Morris 
and  Mary  Ann  Ballard.  He  emigrated 
to  America  in  October,  1878,  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  14,  1890,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  12,  1916,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
1,  1919,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

RASMUSSEN,  Arelius  Peter,  Bish- 
op of  the  Midvale  1st  Ward,  East 
Jordan  Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  2,  1886,  in 
Draper,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Peter  Christian  Rasmussen  and  Mette 
Marie  Jensen.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
1,  1895,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
30,  1915,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  or- 
dained Bishop  of  the  Midvale  Ward 
Nov.  8,  1927,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards, 
and  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Mid- 
vale First  Ward  July  15,  1928,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

SMITH,  Alma  Fitzgerald,  Bishop  of 
the  Draper  Ward,  East  Jordan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  29,  1889,  in  Draper,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Heber  A.  Smith 
and  Sarah  Jane  Fitzgerald.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  Germany  in 
1914,  but  was  transferred  to  the  South- 
ern States  on  account  of  the  World 
war;  returned  home  in  1916.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  of 
the  Sandy  3rd  Ward  Dec.  12,  1920,  by 
Rudger  Clawson,  and  was  set  apart 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  as  Bishop 
of  the  Draper  Ward  Aug.  21,  1927. 

WOOTTON,  William  Charles,  Bish- 
op of  the  Butler  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1930,  was 
born  Nov.  11,  1879,  in  South  Cotton- 
wood, Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  R.  Wootton  and  Esther  Bal- 
lard. He  was  baptized  June  6,  1888, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  17,  1900,  by 
George   Teasdale,   filled   a   mission  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


459 


the  Southern  States  in  1900-1902,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Aug.  10,  1919,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage. 

WRIGHT,  Joseph  Brigham,  Bishop 
of  the  Midvale  Ward,  East  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1902  to  1915,  was 
born  May  17,  1861,  in  Lichfield,  Staf- 
fordshire, England,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Wright  and  Elizabeth  Smith.  He  was 
baptized  when  eighteen  years  old, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1883,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  15,  1895, 
by  Joseph  E.  Taylor,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  April  7,  1902,  by  John  R. 
Winder. 


Emery   Stake 


ANDERSON,  Arthur  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  Emery  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1928,  was  born  Dec.  23, 
1882,  in  Mayfield,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Niels  C.  Andersen  and  Christine  W. 
Christensen.  He  was  baptized  July  2, 
1891,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  April  25,  1925,  by  David  0. 
McKay. 

BARNEY,  Joseph  Orson,  Bishop  of 
the  Clawson  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1925,  was  born 
Feb.  19,  1870,  in  Kanosh,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Smith  Barney  and 
Amanda  Azelia  Oviatt.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  April,  1879,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  25,  1904,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May  13, 
1917,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

BEACH,  Lyman  Smith,  Bishop  of 
the  Molen  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1884  to  1891  and  from  1906  to 
1910,  was  born  May  7,  1849,  in  Big 
Cottonwood,  Utah,  the  son  of  Nathan- 
iel S.  Beach  and  Isabella  A.  Saxton. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  old,  moved  to  Manti  in  1855,  and 
to  Perron  in  1878,  and  was  ordained 


a   High   Priest   and   Bishop   Aug.   31, 
1884,  by   Erastus   Snow. 

BEAL,  Newel  K.,  Bishop  of  the 
Ferron  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1906  to  1914,  was  born  April  1, 
1867,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Alma  Beal  and  Levina  Esther  DeMill. 
He  was  baptized  in  1878,  ordained  to 
the  Pi'iesthood,  and  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1899. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
18,  1906,  by  Reuben  G.  Miller,  and  a 
Bishop  April  9,  1906,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 

BERG,  Carl,  Bishop  of  the  Castle 
Dale  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  22,  1869, 
in  Gjerrild,  Randers  amt,  Denmark,  the 
son  of  Andrew  Berg  and  Engeline 
Petersen.  He  was  baptized  in  1877, 
came  to  Utah  in  1885,  was  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Denmark  in  1907-1909.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  8,  1910,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  May 
28,  1929,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

BRASHER,  Reuben,  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Lawrence  Branch,  Emery 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1930,  was 
born  July  26,  1878,  in  Randolph,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  L.  Brasher  and  Eliza 
Cheshire.  He  was  baptized  in  August, 
1886,  ordained  an  Elder  in  1905,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1910-1912,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  12,  1922,  by  Alonzo  E.  Wall,  and 
set  apart  as  presiding  Elder. 

BRINKERHOFF,  Alonzo,  Bishop  of 
the  Emery  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1896  to  1922,  was  born  July  8, 
1864,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  Brinkerhoff  and  Rebecca  Halk. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southei'n  States  in 
1893-1895,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Aug.  9,  1896. 


460 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


CALDWELL,    Joseph    Edwin,   jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Molen  Ward,  Emery 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1910  to  1920,  was 
born  May  21,  1875,  in  Gunnison,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Joseph  Edwin  Caldwell  and 
Anna  P,  Fjeldsted.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1898- 
1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  6,  1910,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards. 

CHRISTENSEN,  Casper,  Bishop  of 
the  Emery  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1883  to  1890,  was  born  Sept.  5, 
1837,  in  Troldborg,  Hjorring  amt, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Christian  Hansen 
and  Bolette  Marie  Mathisen.  He  was 
baptized  in  September,  1868,  emigrat- 
ed to  Minnesota  in  1869,  and  came  to 
Utah  in  1875.  He  was  oi'dained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  12,  1883, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

COX,  Arthur  Ludene,  Bishop  of  the 
Clawson  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930,  was  born  Dec.  13, 
1889,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ar- 
thur Cox  and  Amanda  Funk.  He  was 
baptized  July  10,  1898,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  April  26,  1925,  by  David  6. 
McKay. 

DAY,  Ira  Nelson,  Bishop  of  the 
Lawrence  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1917  to  1921,  was  born  Nov.  11, 
1878,  in  Mt.  Pleasant,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Ira  A.  Day  and  Polly  Ann  Noakes. 
He  was  baptized  March  6,  1887,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op May  12,  1917,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

EDWARDS,  Harrison  Martin,  jun., 

presiding  Elder  of  the  Rochester 
Branch,  Emery  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1923  to  1930,  was  born  Aug.  27,  1866, 
in  Manti,  Utah,  the  son  of  Harrison 
Martin  Edwards  and  Nahomi  Padres. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1884,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  6, 
1923,  by  James  E.  Talmage,  and  set 
apart  as  presiding  Elder  of  Rochester 
Branch. 


GRANGE,  Franklin  Charles,  Bish- 
op of  the  Huntington  Ward,  Emery 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1929,  was 
born  June  24,  1887,  in  Huntington, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel  Grange  and 
Esther  Stevenson.  He  was  baptized 
in  1895,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  May 
13,  1922,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  3,  1924, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

HITCHCOCK,  William  Henry,  Bish- 
op of  the  Clawson  Ward,  Emery 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1904  to  1912,  and 
from  1915  to  1916,  was  born  May  26, 
1870,  in  Spring  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  C.  Hitchcock  and  Petrea  Jensen. 
He  came  to  Ferron  in  1884,  and  to 
Clawson  in  1896.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  25,  1904, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  set  apart 
again  to  preside  as  Bishop  May  25, 
1915,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HOWARD,  William,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Emery  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1888  to  1899,  was  bom 
Jan.  13,  1847,  in  Belfast,  Ireland,  the 
son  of  William  Howard  and  Elizabeth 
Anderson.  He  came  to  America  in 
1853,  was  baptized  March  29,  1857, 
filled  a  mission  to  Europe  in  1868- 
1869,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  12,  1886,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 
He  died  April  6,  1914. 

JENSEN,  John  Young,  Bishop  of 
the  Castle  Dale  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1898  to  1906,  was  born 
April  18,  1858,  in  Ravnholt,  Denmark, 
the  son  of  Niels  Christian  Jensen  and 
Karen  Sejersen.  He  was  baptized  in 
1866  in  Denmark,  and  came  to  Utah 
the  same  year.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug.  12,  1889,  and  a  Bish- 
op April  17,  1898,  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. 

JOHNSON,  Ole  Ray,  Bishop  of 
the  Huntington  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  23,  1889,  in  Huntington,  the  son 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


461 


of  Ole  Christian  Johnson  and  Eliza- 
beth Hill.  He  was  baptized  July  1, 
1899,  ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  15,  1909, 
by  Edward  M.  Guymon,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  New  Zealand  in  1909-1912,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Oct.  26,  1929,  by  Richard  R.  Ly- 
man. 

KILLPACK,  John  David,  Bishop  of 
the  Ferron  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1904  to  1906,  was  born  May  8, 
1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  Joseph  Killpack  and  Eliza 
Elizabeth  Savage.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  14,  1882,  by  John 
Henry  Smith,  and  a  Bishop  April  18, 
1904,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

LARSEN,  Joseph  Jorgen,  Bishop  of 
the  Cleveland  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1930,  was  born 
Aug.  3,  1879,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Erik  Larsen  and  Anna 
Elizabeth  Larsen.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  4,  1887,  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
May  7,  1905,  by  Lars  P.  Larsen,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
1905-1907,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  7,  1910,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

LARSEN,  Samuel  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Castle  Dale  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1928,  was  born 
Dec.  8,  1865,  in  Spring  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Christen  G.  Larsen  and  Marie 
Cai'oline  Sorensen.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  16,  1874,  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Nov.  5,  1907,  by  Rudger  Clawson, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern  States 
in  1907-1909,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  18,  1910,  by  Lars  P.  Ove- 
son,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  11,  1912,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

LEONARD,  David  Heber,  Bishop  of 
the  Huntington  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1916  to  1924,  was  born 
July  13,  1869,  in  St.  John,  Utah,  the 
son  of  David  Henry  Leonard  and 
Emma  Eliza  Child.     He  was  baptized 


when  eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1906-1907 
(six  months),  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  14,  1916, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

MILLER,  Christian  Marius,  Bishop 

of  the  Lawrence  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1900  to  1913,  was  born 
May  5,  1857,  in  Nexo,  Bornholm,  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Peter  P.  Miller  and 
Petrea  C.  Rebo.  He  was  baptized  in 
November,  1868,  in  Denmark,  came 
to  Utah  in  1890,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1898-1900,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
April  17,  1900,  by  George  Teasdale. 

MILLS,  Henry  George,  Bishop  of 
the  Victor  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1906  to  1918,  was  born  Nov.  14, 
1861,  in  Bognar,  Sussex,  England,  the 
son  of  George  Mills  and  Caroline  Bon- 
ell.  He  came  to  America  when  young, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
19,  1904,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  a 
Bishop  Jan.  14,  1906,  by  the  same 
Apostle. 

MOORE,  Calvin  White,  Bishop  of 
the  Lawrence  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1889  to  1900,  was  born 
July  21,  1827,  in  Palmer,  Hampden 
Co.,  Mass.,  the  son  of  Ethan  A.  Moore 
and  Sarah  Webber.  He  was  baptized 
in  1835,  in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Mormon  Battalion  in 
1846-1847  and  came  to  Utah  in  1848. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  12,  1889,  by  John  Henry 
Smith. 

NELSON,  Hyrum  Alonzo,  Bishop 
of  the  Ferron  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1895  to  1904,  was  born 
Dec.  28,  1861,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Andrew  Nelson  and  Christina  Jen- 
sen. He  moved  to  Ferron  in  1883,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  10, 
1890,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund,  and  a  Bish- 
op Feb.  10,  1895,  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. 


462 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


NELSON,  Victor  Daniel,  Bishop  of 
the  Ferron  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1914  to  1917,  was  born  Aug.  24, 
1889,  in  Ferron,  the  son  of  Hyrum  A. 
Nelson  and  Mary  A.  Lowry.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  5,  1897,  ordained  an 
Elder  Sept.  19,  1910,  by  Christen 
Petersen,  filled  a  mission  to  Norway 
in  1910-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  9,  1914,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

NIELSEN,  Anton,  Bishop  of  the 
Huntington  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1906  to  1916,  was  born 
Dec.  20,  1866,  in  Aaluni,  Viborg  amt, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Jens  Nielsen  and 
Anna  Chi'istine  Hansen.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  came 
to  Utah  in  an  early  day,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1892-1894. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  14,  1906,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

OLSEN,  Gerald  Lund,  Bishop  of  the 
Emery  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
29,  1900,  in  Emery,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Geo.  T.  Olsen  and  Catherine  M.  Ed- 
wards. He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1911, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  12, 
1922,  by  Alma  G.  Jewkes,  and  a  Bish- 
op Jan.  28,  1928,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

OLSEN,  Kenning,  Bishop  of  the 
Castle  Dale  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1882  to  1896,  was  born 
Jan.  3,  1830,  in  Ostrup,  Denmark,  the 
son  of  Ole  Petersen  and  Marie  Skrad- 
der.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1861  and 
lived  in  Spring  City  until  1882,  when 
he  was  called  to  Castle  Dale  to  pre- 
side. He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
13,  1882,  by  Erastus  Snow.  He  died 
Jan.  12,  1904. 

PEACOCK,    Brigham    James,    jun.. 

Bishop  of  the  Emery  Ward,  Emery 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1925,  was 
born  April  8,  1882,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Brigham  J.  Peacock  and  Sarah 


E.  Cox.  He  was  baptized  March  10, 
1891,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  12,  1922,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

PETERSEN,      Wilford      Christian, 

Bishop  of  the  Ferron  Ward,  Emery 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1927,  was 
born  Nov.  2,  1889,  in  Ferron,  the  son 
of  Christian  Petersen  and  Margrethe 
Lorentzen.  He  was  baptized  July  10, 
1898,  ordained  an  Elder  May  3,  1909, 
by  Newel  K.  Beal,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  Samoa  in  1909-1912.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  9,  1914,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop  Nov,  5, 
1917,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

PETERSON,  Albert  Richard,  presi- 
dent of  the  Emery  Stake  of  Zion, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  8,  1882,  at  Richfield,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Ole  Petersen  and  Julia  Marie 
Hansen.  He  was  baptized  March  2, 
1894,  ordained  an  Elder  May  2,  1905, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Norway  in 
1905-1907,  and  a  second  mission  to 
Norway  in  1923-1926.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  9,  1914,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant,  and  from  1919  to  1923 
he  acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Storrs  Ward, 
and  from  April,  1928,  to  April,  1929, 
as  Bishop  of  the  Ferron  Ward.  He 
was  set  apart  April  28,  1929,  by  Jos. 

F.  Smith,  jun.,  as  president  of  the 
Emery  Stake. 

PULSIPHER,  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Huntington  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1883  to  1891,  was  born 
April  20,  1830,  in  Spaflford,  Onondago 
Co.,  New  York,  the  son  of  Zerah  Pul- 
sipher and  Mary  Brown.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  May,  1838,  came  to  Utah  in 
1848,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
3,  1883,  by  Wilford  Woodruff.  He 
died  Nov.  19,  1915. 

REID,  Henry  McEwan,  Bishop  of 
the  Orangeville  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1906  to  1921,  was  born 
Dec.  18,  1852,  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


463 


the  son  of  William  D.  Reid  and  Jane 
McEwan.  He  came  to  Utah  at  an 
early  age  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  14,  1906,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith.  He  died  Feb.  10, 
1926. 

ROBERTSON,  Jasper,  Bishop  of 
the  Orangeville  Ward,  Emery  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1882  to  1906,  was  born 
May  8,  1847,  in  Walkersville,  Green 
Co.,  111.,  the  son  of  Nichols  Robertson 
and  Jane  Hunter.  He  was  baptized 
in  June,  1862,  en  route  across  the 
plains,  located  in  Fountain  Green,  San- 
pete Co.,  Utah,  in  1863,  and  in  Orange- 
ville in  1880.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  13,  1882,  by 
Erastus  Snow,  and  died  Jan.  17,  1916, 
in  Orangeville,  Utah. 

SEELY,  Orange,  first  counselor  in 
the  Emery  Stake  presidency,  Utah, 
from  1880  to  1899,  was  born  Feb.  20, 
1843,  in  Nashville,  Lee  Co.,  Iowa,  the 
son  of  Justus  W.  Seely  and  Clarissa 
Jane  Wilcox.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  came  to  the  Valley  in 
1847,  was  ordained  a  Bishop  in  1877 
and  presided  over  the  Mt.  Pleasant 
North  Ward.  Later  he  presided  over 
the  Castle  Dale,  Ferron  and  Hunting- 
ton Wards  successively. 

SNOW,  Perry  Edward,  Bishop  of 
the  Ferron  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct. 
26,  1901,  in  Castle  Dale,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Edw.  G.  Snow  and  Georgine  Shiner. 
He  was  baptized  July  3,  1910,  was  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1925-1927,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  28,  1929,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

TAYLOR,  John  Hyrum,  Bishop  of 
the  Orangeville  Ward,  Emery  Stake. 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  1,  1879,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Jos.  Hyrum  Taylor  and  Martha 
Ann  Tatton.    He  was  ordained  a  High 


Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.   13,   1921,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

TAYLOR,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Ferron  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1879  to  1882,  was  born  Aug.  16, 
1824,  in  Hampton-in-Arden,  Warwick- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  Richard 
Taylor  and  Esther  Smith.  He  was 
baptized  March  10,  1851,  in  England, 
came  to  Utah  at  an  early  day,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  20,  1868, 
and  a  Bishop  Oct.  9,  1879.  He  died 
May  19,  1904. 

WELLS,  Thomae,  Bishop  of  the 
Victor  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1918  to  1929,  was  born  Sept.  6, 
1860,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Samuel  Wells  and  Sarah  Ann  Hattes- 
ley.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  11,  1868, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Western  States 
in  1908-1909,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  12,  1909,  by  John  H.  Pace, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  10,  1918, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

WELLS,  Thomas  Movell,  Bishop  of 
the  Victor  Ward,  Emery  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930  + ,  was  born  March 
28,  1907,  at  Desert  Lake,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Samuel  Wells  and  Viola  M. 
Dodge.  He  was  baptized  July  4,  1915, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  April  27,  1930,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 


Ensign  Stake 


ALDOUS,  Heber  Kay,  Bishop  of 
the  12th-13th  Ward,  Ensign  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1922  to  1929,  was  born 
June  26,  1877,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Heber  B.  Aldous  and  Susan 
A.  Kay.  He  was  baptized  in  1885  by 
John  Cottam,  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1897  by  John  Henry  Smith,  filled  a 
mission  to  New  Zealand  in  1897-1901, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  22, 
1904,  by  Richard  W.  Young,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  5,  1922,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 


464 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ALLEN,  William  Land  Nuttle. 
Bishop  of  the  21st  Ward,  Ensign 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1883  to  1893,  was 
born  May  22,  1825,  in  Kingston-on- 
Hull,  Yorkshire,  England,  a  son  of 
Thomas  Allen  and  Mary  Nuttle.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  27,  1848,  by  Thom- 
as Jackson,  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Jan.  21,  1849,  and  labored  as  a  local 
Elder  in  Hull,  England.  On  March 
16,  1851,  he  was  appointed  to  preside 
over  the  Hull  Branch.  He  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1853,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  22,  1856,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.  16,  1883,  by  Angus  M. 
Cannon.  He  died  Nov.  16,  1893,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah. 

BURT,  Andrew  Hill,  Bishop  of  the 
21st  Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1877  to  1883,  was  born  Oct.  21,  1828, 
in  Dumfermline,  Fifeshire,  Scotland, 
a  son  of  Andrew  Burt  and  Isabella 
Hill.  He  was  baptized  May  19,  1848, 
by  John  Sharp,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1852,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  July 
5,  1877,  by  Orson  Pratt.  He  died  Aug. 
25,  1883. 

COPENING,  Frank  Layfette,  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Ensign  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1923, 
was  born  June  7,  1869,  in  Bessville, 
Missouri,  a  son  of  Jacob  Copening 
and  Missouri  Bess.  He  was  baptized 
in  1892  by  Elmer  Taylor  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  March  20,  1920, 
by  Charles  W.  Penrose. 

COVEY,  Benjamin,  Bishop  of  the 
12th  Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1849  to  1856,  was  born  March  7,  1792, 
in  Duchess  County,  New  York,  a  son 
of  Walter  and  Sarah  Covey.  He  was 
set  apart  as  Bishop  Feb.  22,  1849. 

EMPEY,  Nelson  Adam,  Bishop  of 
the  13th  Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1890  to  1904,  was  born  May  7, 
1837,  in  Preston,  Ontario,  Canada,  a 
son  of  William  Empey  and  Mary  Ann 
Morgan.    He  was  baptized  when  about 


eight  years  old  by  his  father  in  Nau- 
voo,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1877-1878,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  31,  1881.  On  April  8,  1891, 
he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  George 
Q.  Cannon.    He  died  Sept.  4,  1904. 

HALE,  Howard  Hoskins,  Bishop  of 
the  12th-13th  Ward,  Ensign  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  10,. 
1876,  in  Portage,  Utah,  a  son  of  Mar- 
tin Van  Buren  Hale  and  Martha  Ar- 
nold. He  was  baptized  May  11,  1884, 
by  Enoch  Harris,  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  George  Teasdale  Nov.  21,  1900, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1900-1902,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  8,  1927,  by  George  H.  Wal- 
lace, and  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  25, 
1930,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

LYTLE,  John,  Bishop  of  the  11th 
Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  from  1849  to  1856,  was  born 
Aug.  18,  1803,  in  Northumberland, 
Pennsylvania,  a  son  of  Andrew  and 
Sarah  Lytle.  He  was  baptized  in  May, 
1836,  arrived  in  Utah  in  1848,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  July  13,  1851,  by 
Edward  Hunter.  In  1856  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Carson  Valley.  He 
died  Oct.  12,  1892. 

McAllister,  George  Stanley, 

Bishop  of  the  11th  Ward,  Ensign 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  26,  1869,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Duncan  M.  Mc- 
Allister and  Catherine  Perkes.  He 
was  baptized  June  18,  1877,  by  John 
Tingey,  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  2, 
1892,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1892-1895.  On  March  22,  1916,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Nephi  L. 
Morris,  and  in  February,  1921,  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Charles  W.  Pen- 
rose. 

PINGREE,  Franklin,  Bishop  of  the 
University  Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  Utah, 
from   1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  July 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


465 


15,  1880,  in  Ogden,  Weber  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Job  Pingree  and  Esther 
Hooper.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1888, 
by  his  father,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood and  filled  a  mission  to  Germany 
in  1901-1904,  and  on  Jan.  5,  1918,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Rudger 
Clawson.  On  Sept.  14,  1924,  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Pres.  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

PLATT,  Franklin  Benjamin,  Bishop 
of  the  13th  Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1904  to  1908,  and  later  Bishop 
of  the  12th-13th  Ward,  of  said  Stake, 
from  1908  to  1922,  was  born  Oct.  13, 
1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Francis  Piatt  and  Eliza  Hester. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  3,  1864,  by  Na- 
than Davis,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood 
and  filled  a  mission  to  California  in 
1897-1899,  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  30, 
1904,  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith,  and 
sustained  as  Bishop  of  the  new  12th- 
13th  Ward  Jan.  28,  1908,  being  set 
apai't  to  this  position  by  Heber  J. 
Grant.   He  died  March  14,  1928. 

RICHARDS,  Joel,  Bishop  of  the 
27th  Ward,  Ensign  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  April  5, 
1887,  in  Nephi,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  George  F.  Richards  and  Alice  A. 
Robinson.  He  was  baptized  April  5, 
1895,  by  Joseph  M.  Dunn,  ordained  a 
Seventy  March  17,  1908,  by  M.  E. 
Crandall  and  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1910-1913.  He  was  oi-dained 
a  High  Priest  March  3,  1918,  by  John 
Wells,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  12, 
1922,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 


Franklin  Stake 

ALLEN,  Alexander  Alma,  Bishop 
of  the  Weston  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1877  to  1886,  was  born 
Sept.  28,  1846,  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  the 
son  of  Ezra  H.  Allen  and  Sarah  B. 
Fisk.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1852,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 


1885-1886,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  22,  1876,  by  Brigham  Young,  jun., 
and  a  Bishop  May  21,  1877,  by  the 
same  Apostle.    He  died  July  31,  1916. 

BARTON,  Walter  K.,  president  of 
the  Franklin  Stake  of  Zion,  Idaho, 
from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec. 
14,  1877,  in  Sterling,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Walter  Kilshaw  Barton  and  Susan 
Angeline  Petty.  He  was  baptized  July 
1,  1886,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  30,  1911,  by  James  Bodily,  acted 
as  second  counselor  in  the  Oneida 
Stake  presidency  from  1920  to  1922, 
and  as  first  counselor  from  1922  to 
1927,  He  was  chosen  as  president  of 
the  Franklin  Stake  Nov.  27,  1927. 

BASTIAN,  Niels  Soren,  Bishop  of 
the  Weston  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  9,  1889,  in  Washington,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Jacob  Bastian  and  Metta  Ma- 
ria Sanders.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  3, 
1897,  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1919 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.   15,  1929,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

BENSON,  George  Taft,  jun.,  first 
counselor  in  the  Franklin  Stake  presi- 
dency, Idaho,  from  192T  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  June  24,  1875,  in  Logan, 
Utah,  the  son  of  George  Taft  Benson 
and  Louise  Ballif.  He  was  baptized 
June  24,  1883,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  7,  1915,  by  Orrin  P.  Miller, 
and  set  apart  Nov.  27,  1927,  as  coun- 
selor in  the  stake  presidency.  He  died 
Aug.  13,  1934. 

BINGHAM,  Heber  Raymond,  Bish- 
op of  the  Linrose  Ward,  Franklin 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1930 -H, 
was  born  Nov.  20,  1884,  in  Wilson, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Brigham  Heber  Bing- 
ham and  Catherine  R.  Wilson.  He  was 
baptized  March  28,  1893,  ordained  a 
Seventy  in  1906,  filled  a  mission  to 
Germany  in  1906-1909,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Sept,  24,  1922,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 


Vol.  IV.  No.  30 


July  25,  1936 


466 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


BODILY,  Edwin,  Bishop  of  the 
Fail-view  Ward,  Franklin  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1904  to  1919,  was  born  Dec. 
12,  1851,  in  Port  Elizabeth,  South  Af- 
rica, the  son  of  Robert  Bodily  and 
Jane  Pittam.  He  was  baptized  in 
South  Africa,  came  to  Utah,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northwestern  States 
in  1885-1888.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  28,  1888,  by  Geo.  C.  Par- 
kinson, and  sustained  as  Bishop  Dec. 
27,  1903. 

BODILY,  Henry  James,  Bishop  of 
the  Preston  1st  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1914  to  1918,  was  born 
Oct.  23,  1875,  in  Fairview,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Edwin  Bodily  and  Matilda  Rob- 
erts. He  was  baptized  Aug.  24,  1885, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  6, 
1908,  by  Charles  D.  Goaslind,  and  a 
Bishop  June  6,  1914,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

CARLSON,  Carl  Hyrum,  second 
counselor  in  the  Franklin  Stake  presi-. 
dency,  Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  11,  1892,  at  Logan, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  A.  Carlson  and 
Annie  Lundstrom.  He  was  baptized 
May  15,  1900,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1923,  and  was  sustained  as 
Bishop  June  24,  1923.  He  presided 
over  the  Preston  1st  Ward  until  Nov. 
27,  1927,  when  he  was  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  stake  presi- 
dency by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

CHADWICK,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Whitney  Ward,  Franklin  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1889-1893,  was  born  June  23, 
1842,  near  Oldham,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  Joseph  Chadwick  and 
Mary  Whitehead.  He  came  to  Utah 
in  1860,  located  in  Whitney  in  1874, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  15,  1889,  by  Moses 
Thatcher. 

CORBRIDGE,  James  Heber,  Bishop 
of  the  Preston  6th  Ward,  Franklin 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1924,  was 


born  Dec.  16,  1872,  in  Franklin,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  John  Corbridge  and  Han- 
nah Lee.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  1, 
1881,  filled  a  mission  to  England,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  6,  1914, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop  Dec 
19,  1920,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

DUNKLEY,  Joseph,  jun.,  Bishop  of 

the  Whitney  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1922,  was  born 
Sept.  15,  1869,  in  Frankhn,  the  son 
of  Joseph  Dunkley  and  Margaret 
Wright.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1895-1898,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  7,  1915,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

GASSMAN,  Otto,  Bishop  of  the 
Weston  Ward,  Franklin  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1902  to  1911,  was  born  July  6, 
1862,  in  Providence,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Hans  Heinrich  Gassman  and  Cather- 
ine Knopfell.  He  was  baptized  about 
1871,  came  to  Weston  when  six  years 
old,  and  was  chosen  Bishop  in  1902. 

HANSEN,  Lorenzo  Erastus,  Bishop 
of  the  Preston  2nd  Ward,  Franklin 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1930,  was 
born  July  9,  1879,  in  Plain  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Proben  A.  Hansen  and  Em- 
ma Petersen.  He  was  baptized  May 
9,  1888,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1902-1905,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Jan.  8,  1922,  by  Mel- 
vin J.  Ballard. 

HULL,  Alvin  C,  Bishop  of  the  Whit- 
ney Ward,  Franklin  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1922  to  1929,  was  born  Feb.  12, 
1880,  in  Preston,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
Robert  McClellan  Hull  and  Mary  Ann 
Chadwick.  After  being  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  he  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States  in  1904-1906.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March  7, 
1915,  by  Orrin  P.  Miller,  and  a  Bishop 
Dec.  3,  1922,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

JENSEN,  Ernest  Anton,  Bishop  of 
the  Preston  1st  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


467 


Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930,  was  born 
Aug.  5,  1901,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Amos  B.  C.  Jensen  and  Hansine  P. 
Hansen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  5, 
1901,  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  7,  1910, 
by  O.  L.  Packer,  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia  in  1910-1912,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
27,  1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

KELLER,  Janues  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Mapleton  Ward,  Franklin  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1919  to  1924,  was  born  April 
14,  1887,  in  Mink  Creek,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  James  Keller  and  Catherine 
Larsen.  He  was  baptized  April  14, 
1895,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  16, 
1917,  by  Joseph  S.  Geddes,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  June  15,  1919,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

MAUGHAN,  Edward  LeRoy,  Bish- 
op of  the  Mapleton  Ward,  Franklin 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930,  was 
born  March  24,  1895,  in  Logan,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Peter  W.  Maughan  and 
Mary  L.  Naef .  He  was  baptized  March 
31,  1903,  moved  to  Mapleton  in  1921, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  31,  1924,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

MERRILL,  .Orrin  Jackson,  Bishop 
of  the  Mapleton  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1908  to  1910,  was  born 
June  22,  1856,  in  Cottonwood,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Samuel  Bemus  Merrill  and 
Elizabeth  Runyan.  He  moved  to  Cache 
Valley  in  1860,  and  to  Mapleton  in 
1880,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  13,  1891,  by  Geo.  C.  Parkinson, 
and  a  Bishop  in  1908. 

MONSON,  Alma  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Preston  6th  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1924  to  1929,  was  born 
Sept.  9,  1889,  at  Whitney,  Idaho.  He 
was  baptized  July  2,  1897,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  24,  1922,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  29,  1924, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 


PALMER,  John  Frank,  Bishop  of 
the  Preston  5th  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 -f,  was  born 
Aug.  1,  1892,  in  Croydon,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  Palmer  and  Eliza  Wain- 
wright.  He  was  baptized  April  30, 
1910,  and  after  being  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1912-1914.  He  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  1, 
1929,  by  Melvin  J.   Ballard. 

PARKINSON,    Bernice  Richard, 

Bishop  of  the  Franklin  Ward,  Frank- 
lin Stake,  Idaho,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  12,  1893,  in  Franklin,  the  son 
of  Samuel  C.  Parkinson  and  Maryann 
Hobbs.  He  was  baptized  June  7,  1902, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
in  1915-1917,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  16,  1919,  by  Jos.  S.  Ged- 
des, and  a  Bishop  Feb.  23,  1930,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

PERKINS,  Edward  Martin,  Bishop 

of  the  Mapleton  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1891  to  1908  and  from 
1910  to  1912,  was  born  Jan.  10,  1860, 
in  Provo,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Perkins  and  Margaret  Martin.  He 
was  baptized  March  16,  1882,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1888-1890, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  13,  1891,  by  Marriner  W. 
Merrill. 

RASMUSSEN,  James  Peter,  Bishop 
of  the  Cedarville  Ward,  Franklin 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1930-1- , 
was  born  Feb.  4,  1875,  in  Mantua, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Jens  Rasmussen  and 
Inga  Sophia  Jensen.  He  was  baptized 
May  3,  1883,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  8,  1922,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

RAWLINGS,  Henry  Helaman,  Bish- 
op of  the  Fairview  Ward,  Franklin 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1930,  was 
born  April  8,  1893,  in  Fairview,  the  son 
of  Ether  Rawlings  and  Loretta  Jane 


468 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Inglet.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  1, 1903, 
ordained  an  Elder  June  1,  1913,  by 
Samuel  W.  Parkinson,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1913- 

1914.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  15,  1919,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard, 
who  also  ordained  him  a  Bishop  Sept. 
12,  1920. 

RAWLINGS,  Walter,  jun.,  Bishop  of 
the  Pi-eston  6th  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930,  was  born 
Dec.  18,  1891,  in  Fairview,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Walter  Rawlings  and  Lottie 
May  Elizabeth  Inglet.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  6,  1901,  filled  a  mission  to 
England  in  1911-1913,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  16,  1916, 
and  a  Bishop  Sept.  15,  1929,  by  Geo. 
F.   Richards. 

ROSE,  Thomas  Edmond,  Bishop  of 
the  Weston  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1919  to  1929,  was  born 
Feb.  17,  1884,  in  Weston,  the  son  of 
Hyrum  Rose  and  Martha  Shaw.  He 
was  baptized  July  7,  1892,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
15,  1919,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

SIMPSON,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Cedarville  Ward,  Franklin  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, fi-om  1916  to  1917,  was  born  April 
12,  1864,  in  Leicester,  England,  the 
son  of  Charles  Simpson  and  Susannah 
Moore.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  1,  1904, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op June  4,  1916,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

TANNER,  George  LeRoy,  Bishop  of 
the  Whitney  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  30,  1891,  in  North  Powder,  Ore- 
gon, the  son  of  William  Tanner  and 
Lillias  Speirs.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
30,  1899,  ordained  an  Elder  June  20, 

1915,  by  Geo.  T.  Benson,  jun.,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1915-1917.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  3,  1922,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith,  and  a  Bishop  March  10,  1929, 
by  David  O.  McKay. 


THOMANDER,     Daniel     Theodore, 

Bishop  of  the  Mapleton  Ward,  Frank- 
lin Stake,  Idaho,  from  1914  to  1915, 
was  born  Nov.  28,  1870,  in  Ephraim, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Peter  Thomander  and 
Ingeborg  Pehrson.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  10,  1879,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  22,  1907,  by  Reuben  H.  Miller, 
and  a  Bishop  June  6,  1914,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards. 

WHITEHEAD,  Peter  Green,  Bishop 
of  the  Franklin  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1923  to  1929,  was  born 
Sept.  7,  1874,  in  Franklin,  the  son  of 
William  Whitehead  and  Margaret 
Green.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  6,  1883, 
ordained  a  Seventy  April  18,  1905,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1905-1907,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March  2, 
1923,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard.  He  was 
sustained  as  Bishop  July  29,  1923. 

WISER,  William  Harvey,  Bishop  of 
the  Fairview  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1919  to  1920,  was  born 
Feb.  26,  1887,  in  Lewiston,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  H.  Wiser  and  Eustacia 
Cunningham.  He  was  baptized  May 
18,  1895,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1906-1908.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  15,  1919, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballai-d. 

WOODWARD,  Cecil,  Bishop  of  the 
Franklin  Ward,  Franklin  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1923,  was  born  Dec.  24, 
1881,  in  Franklin,  the  son  of  William 
Woodward  and  Rebecca  Wright.  He 
was  baptized  Dec.  24,  1889,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Dec.  7,  1912,  by  James 
Johnson,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  7,  1919, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 


Fremont  Stake 

ANDERSON,     Wilford     Christian, 
Bishop    of    the    Independence    Ward, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


469 


Fremont  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1925  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  26,  1889,  in 
Redmond,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Andrew  P.  Anderson  (Andreas 
Hansen)  and  Karen  Petersen.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  15,  1897,  moved  to  Ida- 
ho in  1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  27,  1925,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard, 

ARCHIBALD,  David  Watson,  Bish- 
op of  the  Salem  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  in  1930 -f,  was  born  Aug.  23, 
1889,  in  Rexburg,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
Robei't  R.  Archibald  and  Isabella  Wat- 
son. He  was  baptized  in  1899,  ordain- 
ed an  Elder  in  the  spring  of  1909, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1909-1911,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  25,  1921,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards, and  a  Bishop  May  11,  1930. 

ARCHIBALD,  Robert  G.,  Bishop  of 
the  Rexburg  1st  Ward,  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1914  to  1923,  was 
born  Jan.  17,  1872,  in  Wellsville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Robert  R.  Archibald  and 
Isabel  Watson.  He  was  baptized  May 
7,  1880,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and 
filled  a  mission  in  1895-1898  to  the 
Southern  States.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  22,  1912,  by  Nathan 
Ricks,  and  a  Bishop  July  26,  1914,  by 
Geo.  F,  Richards. 

ARNOLD,  Amos  G.,  Bishop  of  the 
Lyman  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1886  to  1887,  was  born  March 
12,  1833,  in  Houndsfield,  Jefferson 
Co.,  New  York,  the  son  of  Daniel  Ar- 
nold and  Lydia  Willey.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  7,  1867,  by  James  Win- 
chester, and  after  his  arrival  in  Ida- 
ho he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  18,  1886,  by  John  W.  Tay- 
lor.   He  died  June  27,  1926. 

BELNAP,  Francis  Eugene,  Bishop 
of  the  Piano  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930,  was  born 
June  20,  1880,  in  Hooper,  Utah,  the 


son  of  Francis  L.  Belnap  and  Lillis 
L.  Robinson.  He  was  baptized  July 
2, 1888,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  30,  1928,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

BLASER,  Ernest,  Bishop  of  the 
Piano  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1916  to  1928,  was  born  Sept.  28, 
1891,  in  Bern,  Switzerland,  the  son 
of  Robert  Blaser  and  Emma  Stauffig- 
er.  He  emigrated  to  Idaho  in  1900, 
was  baptized  Sept.  28,  1900,  ordained 
an  Elder  April  25,  1910,  by  John  D. 
Speirs,  and  filled  a  mission  to  Switz- 
erland and  Germany  in  1911-1914.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op March  11,  1916,  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay. 

BRIGGS,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Archer  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1902  to  1907,  was  born  Oct.  15, 
1858,  in  Tupton,  Derbyshire,  England, 
the  son  of  Charles  Briggs  and  Mary 
A.  Worrell.  He  joined  the  Church  in 
June,  1876,  and  came  to  Utah  soon 
after.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1910-1911,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Aug.  17,  1884,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  in 
1902,  by  Abraham  Owen  Woodruff.  He 
died  Jan.  23,  1919. 

BROWN,  Henry  Alonzo,  Bishop  of 
the  Piano  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, in  1930 +  ,  was  born  June  30,  1880, 
in  Oxford,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Smith  Brown  and  Sarah  Shumway. 
He  was  baptized  in  May,  1889,  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  California  in  1905-1906,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  June,  1912, 
by  James  Blake,  and  a  Bishop  Sept. 
28,   1930,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

COOK,  James  Moores,  Bishop  of  the 
Rexburg  2nd  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1907  to  1912,  was  born 
June  5,  1850,  in  Timperley,  Cheshire, 
England,  the  son  of  Thomas  Cook  and 


470 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Mary  Brundrett.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  23,  1880,  in  Manchester,  Eng- 
land, by  John  Rider,  came  to  Utah 
in  1881,  and  moved  to  Idaho  in  1883. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1895-1897,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  15,  1907,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

DALEY,  Oliver  C,  Bishop  of  the 
Rexburg  1st  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1907  to  1914,  was  born 
Nov.  11,  1871,  in  Levan,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Christian  Christiansen  and  Anna 
Marie  Jensen.  After  being  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood  he  filled  a  mission 
to  Denmark  in  1900-1902,  moved  to 
Rexburg  in  1905,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  16, 
1907,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

DONALDSON,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Teton  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1884  to  1893,  was  born  Sept.  30, 
1842,  in  London,  England,  the  son  of 
Wm.  Donaldson  and  Rachel  Notman. 
He  was  baptized  in  June,  1862,  in 
England,  came  to  Utah  in  1863,  filled 
a  mission  to  England  in  1880-1882, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June  10, 
1884,  by  Wilford  Woodruff.  He  died 
July  23,  1926. 

FISHER,  Frederic  Merle,  Bishop 
of  the  Rexburg  3rd  Ward,  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1925  to  1930,  was 
born  Jan.  31,  1887,  at  Bountiful,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  Fisher  and  Harriet 
Knighton.  He  moved  to  Rexburg  in 
1910,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  December,  1912,  by  James  Blake, 
and  a  Bishop  Sept.  27,  1925,  by  Mel- 
vin  J.  Ballard. 

HAMILTON,  Charles  Orson,  Bish- 
op of  the  Sugar  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  6,  1883,  at  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the 
son  of  James  C.  Hamilton  and  Isa- 
belle  H.  Hill.  He  was  baptized  June 
2,  1891,  ordained  an  Elder  by  Brig- 
ham  F.  Price  and  filled  a  mission  to 


Great  Britain  in  1907-1909.  He  filled 
a  second  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1915-1917,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Sept.  25,  1925,  by 
Mark  Austin,  and  a  Bishop  June  25, 
1927,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

HARRIS,  Bernice  Rawlins,  Bishop 
of  the  Salem  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1905  to  1921,  was  born 
March  6,  1867,  in  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah,  the  son  of  George  H.  A.  Har- 
ris and  Sarah  Loader.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  8,  1875,  and  later  ordained 
a  High  Priest.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Jan.  29,  1906,  by  Geo.  Albert 
Smith. 

HARRIS,  George  Henry  Burriston. 

Bishop  of  the  Salem  Ward,  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1884  to  1900,  was 
born  April  10,  1857,  in  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah,  the  son  of  Geo.  H.  A. 
Harris  and  Ann  Burriston.  He  came 
to  Salem  in  1883,  as  one  of  the  first 
settlers,  and  was  chosen  a  member 
of  the  High  Council  of  the  Bannock 
Stake.  He  was  appointed  Bishop  Nov. 
23,  1884. 

HEMSLEY,  Richard,  jun.,  Bishop 
of  the  Piano  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1905  to  1908,  and  from 
1910  to  1914,  was  born  Oct.  12,  1864, 
in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the  son  of  Rich- 
ard Hemsley  and  M.  Christine  Jen- 
sen. He  was  baptized  April  1,  1886, 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1908- 
1910,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
26,  1902,  by  Thomas  E.  Bassett,  and 
set  apart  as  Bishop  Sept.  3,  1905. 

HEATH,   Albert,  first  counselor  in 

the  Fremont  Stake  presidency,  Idaho, 
from  1910  to  1919,  was  bom  May  8, 
1863,  in  Dinas  Powis,  near  Cardiff, 
Wales,  of  English  parentage.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1877,  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  July  26,  1903,  by  Mathias  F. 
Cowley,  and  died  in  April,  1919. 

HIBBARD,  George  A.,  Bishop  of 
the    Hibbard    Ward,   Fremont    Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


471 


Idaho,  from  1895  to  1906,  was  born 
July  18,  1857,  in  Farmington,  Utah, 
the  son  of  George  Hibbard  and  Anna 
Williams.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  9,  1895,  by 
John  Henry  Smith. 

HOGG,  George  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Salem  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1921  to  1926,  was  born  Dec.  10, 
1879,  in  Morgan,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Robert  Hogg  and  Mary  A.  Norman. 
He  was  baptized  May  5,  1888,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept. 
25,  1921,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HUSKINSON,  John  Willard,  Bishop 
of  the  Teton  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  23,  1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  William  Huskinson  and 
Jennette  Cousins.  He  was  baptized 
Feb.  27,  1881,  was  ordained  a  Seven- 
ty March  21,  1909,  by  Charles  H.  Hart, 
filled  a  shoi't  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1914,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  26,  1916,  by  Mark  Austin, 
and  a  Bishop  Oct.  5,  1926,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

JOHNSTON,  Jacob,  Bishop  of  the 
Teton  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1894  to  1900,  was  born  June  1, 
1861,  in  Sugar  House,  Utah,  the  son 
of  James  Johnston,  and  was  sustained 
as  Bishop  Jan.  11,  1894. 

KLINGLER,  Alma,  Bishop  of  the 
Rexburg  3rd  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  12, 
1902,  in  Rexburg,  the  son  of  Fredrick 
L.  Klingler  and  Christine  G.  Walz. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  30,  1910,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  27,  1925, 
by  Geo.  S.  Romney,  and  a  Bishop  April 
6,   1930,   by   Rudger   Clawson. 

LUCAS,  Hyrum  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Piano  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1895  to  1903,  was  born  Jan. 
21,  1863,  in  New  Bahl-on-Avon,  Eng- 


land, the  son  of  James  Lucas  and  Har- 
riet Leeson.  He  was  baptized  May  12, 
1872,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  in  1914,  and  was  called 
home  on  account  of  his  father's  death. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  3, 
1895,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith. 

MERRILL,  Leslie  Vinton,  Bishop  of 
the  Rexburg  1st  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1923  to  1925,  was  born 
Jan.  8,  1890,  in  Mapleton,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Samuel  A.  Merrill  and  Elvira 
Tidwell.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1910-1912,  after  being  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Feb.  6,  1910,  by  J. 
Golden  Kimball.  He  was  ordained  a 
High    Priest    and    Bishop    March    18, 

1923,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

OLDHAM,  Samuel  Price,  Bishop  of 

the  Rexburg  4th  Ward,  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930  + ,  was 
born  April  6,  1873,  in  Paradise,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Samuel  Oldham  and  Mary 
Jane  Price.  He  was  baptized  May  10, 
1881,  ordained  a  Seventy  in  August, 
1895,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1895-1898.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  5,  1912, 
by  James  E.  Talmage,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  30,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

OVARD,  William  Martin,  Bishop 
of  the  Rexburg  2nd  Ward,  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930,  was 
born  April  20,  1876,  in  North  Morgan, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Ovard  and 
Susannah  Heiner.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  23,  1918,  by  Thom- 
as  E.   Ricks,  and   a  Bishop  June  21, 

1924,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

PORTER,  Arthur,  jun,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Fremont  Stake  presiden- 
cy, Idaho,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  April  20,  1876,  in  Auckland,  New 
Zealand,  the  son  of  Arthur  Porter  and 
Louisa  Koebel.  He  came  to  Utah  in 
1885,  and  after  being  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood    he    filled     a    mission    to 


472 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Switzerland  in  1896-1899.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Fremont  Stake 
presidency  Sept.  27,  1925,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

RICKS,  Alfred,  Bishop  of  the  Sugar 
Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1905  to  1927,  was  born  Nov.  28,  1869, 
in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas 
E.  Ricks  and  Ellen  M.  Yallop.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  23,  1900, 
by  John  Henry  Smith,  and  a  Bishop 
June  30,  1905.  He  died  Oct.  24,  1927, 
in  Sugar  City,  Idaho. 

RICKS,  Henry  H.  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Teton  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1922  to  1926,  was  born  Jan. 
19,  1898,  the  son  of  John  Ricks  and 
Julia  F.  Ricks.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  17,  1922, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

RICKS,  Hyrum,  Bishop  of  the  Rex- 
burg  3rd  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1907  to  1910,  was  born  July  24, 
1852,  in  Farmington,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  E.  Ricks  and  Tabitha  Hen- 
dricks. He  was  baptized  July  24,  1866, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  May, 
1882,  by  Pres.  John  Taylor.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  June  16,  1907,  by 
Rudger  Clawson.  He  died  in  August, 
1924. 

RICKS,  Orson,  Bishop  of  the  Hib- 
bard  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  April 
23,  1873,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  E.  Ricks  and  Elizabeth  J. 
Shoup.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  1,  1883, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
2,  1913,  by  James  E.  Talmage,  and  a 
Bishop  Sept.  29,  1929,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

RICKS,  Peter  Jeppesen,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Fremont  Stake  presiden- 
cy, Idaho,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  16,  1886,  at  Rexburg,  the 
son  of  Jos.  Ricks  and  Sophie  Nielsea 


He  was  baptized  Nov.  16,  1894,  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  John  D.  Spiers, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1907-1909.  He  was  ordained 
a  High'Priest  May  17,  1914,  by  Eli 
McEntire,  and  a  Bishop  March  27, 
1921,  by  Rudger  Clawson  (Rexburg 
3rd  Ward).  He  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency 
Sept.  25,  1925,  by  Geo.  S.  Romney. 

RIGBY,  Joseph  Eckersley,  Bishop 
of  the  Hibbard  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1906  to  1929,  was  born 
July  27,  1867,  in  Wellsville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  William  F.  Rigby  and  Sophia 
Eckersley.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1, 
1875,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern  States 
in  1902-1904,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  14,  1906,  by 
Charles  W.  Penrose. 

ROMNEY,  George  Samuel,  president 
of  the  Fi-emont  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  12, 
1874,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Miles  Park  Romney  and  Hannah  Hood 
Hill.  He  was  baptized  in  1882,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1897-1900,  was  oi-dained  a  High  Priest 
by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  Fremont  Stake 
Sept.  27,  1925,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 
He  died  Dec.  19,  1935,  in  Rockford,  111. 

RYTTING,  Charles  F.,  Bishop  of 
the  Lyman  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1914  to  1926,  was  born  Nov. 
30,  1866,  in  Upsala,  Sweden,  the  son 
of  Erick  Conrad  Rytting  and  Mary 
Johnson.  He  was  baptized  April  17, 
1878,  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia 
in  1893-1895,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  29,  1906,  by  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney, and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  6, 
1914,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

SCHWENDIMAN,  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Newdale  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


473 


April  7,  1877,  in  Bern,  Switzerland, 
the  son  of  Samuel  Schwendiman  and 
Magdalena  Straubhaar.  He  emigrated 
to  Idaho  in  1886,  filled  a  mission  to 
Switzerland  in  1903-190G,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec. 
21,   1924,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

SMITH,  George  Usher,  Bishop  of 
the  Burton  Ward,  Fremont  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1887  to  1891,  was  born  March 
27,  1842,  in  Durham,  England,  the  son 
of  Thomas  Smith  and  Mary  J.  Usher. 
He  came  to  Utah  in  1859,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  21,  1887. 

SMITH,  James  Raymond,  Bishop  of 
the  Archer  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Jan.  7,  1887,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Isaac  Smith  and  Betsy  A.  Bate- 
man.  He  was  baptized  June  5,  1895, 
ordained  an  Elder  April  21,  1910,  by 
B.  F.  Zimmerman,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1910-1912. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
18,  1914,  by  James  Blake,  and  a  Bish- 
op Sept.  30,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

SMITH,  Richard  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Rexburg  3rd  Wai'd,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1910  to  1921,  was  born 
Jan.  14,  1863,  at  McMerry,  Scotland, 
the  son  of  Richard  Smith  and  Ellen 
Hogg.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1866,  was 
baptized  in  October,  1872,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1907-1909, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  March  13,  1910,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

SNEDAKER,    Jedediah    LeRoy, 

Bishop  of  the  Lyman  Ward,  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930  +  , 
was  born  Sept.  4,  1878,  in  Mill  Creek, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  F.  Snedaker 
and  Sarah  Ann  Thurston.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  Thomas  X.  Smith, 
filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in  1906- 
1909,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  5,  1926,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 


STEINER,    Casper,   Bishop   of   the 

Rexburg  2nd  Ward,  Fremont  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1887  to  1893,  was  born 
April  20,  1846,  in  Bern,  Switzerland, 
the  son  of  John  Steiner  and  Anna  Ma- 
ria Christen.  He  was  baptized  in  1860, 
came  to  Utah  in  1861,  and  moved  to 
Rexburg  in  1884,  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Aug.  21,  1887,  by  Lorenzo 
Snow. 

TANNER,  George  Shepherd,  Bish- 
op of  the  Salem  Ward,  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930,  was 
born  Jan.  26,  1897,  in  Joseph,  Arizona, 
the  son  of  Henry  M.  Tanner  and  Eliza 
E.  Parkinson.  He  was  baptized  Jan. 
28,  1905,  ordained  an  Elder  June  20, 
1918,  by  his  father,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1919-1921, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  18,  1926,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

WINTER,  Timothy  J.,  Bishop  of 
the  Rexburg  3rd  Ward,  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1887  to  1892,  was 
born  Dec.  6,  1859,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  W.  Winter  and 
Myra  Clayton.  He  was  baptized  in 
1868,  moved  to  Rexburg  in  January, 
1886,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  in 
April,  1887,  by  Franklin  D.  Richards. 

WRIGHT,  Hugh  Alexander,  Bishop 
of  the  Rexburg  1st  Ward,  Fremont 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1925  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Feb.  14,  1878,  in  American 
Fork,  Utah,  the  son  of  Frederick 
Wright  and  Margaret  Thornton.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1891,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States  in  1914- 
1917,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  27,  1925,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 


Garfield   Stake 


ALLEN,   Marion   Devalson,   Bishop 

of  the  Kingston  Ward,  Garfield  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1930 -f,  was  born 


474 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Oct.  17,  1883,  at  Kingston,  Piute  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Rufus  A.  Allen  and 
Sarah  Ann  Higgins.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  17,  1891,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  26,  1917,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

BAILEY,  Harvey  Clive,  Bishop  of 
the  Escalante  South  Ward,  Garfield 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  21,  1890,  at  North 
Ogden,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Wesley  Bailey  and  Desdimona 
Rose.  He  was  baptized  July  9,  1899, 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  6,  1917,  by 
Ambrose  Shirts  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Western  States  in  1919-1921. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
28,  1921,  by  George  F.  Richards,  who 
also  ordained  him  a  Bishop  Oct.  28, 
1923. 

BAKER,  Claude  Vincent,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Boulder  Branch,  Garfield 
Stake,  Garfield  Co.,  Utah,  from  1917 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  20,  1881, 
in  Richfield,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  George  Baker  and  Hanna 
Haywood.  He  was  baptized  May  1, 
1889,  ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  15,  1911, 
by  Lewis  Anderson,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  18,  1928,  by  Wallace 
N.  Roundy. 

BAY,  Ira  Milton,  Bishop  of  the 
Junction  Ward,  Garfield  Stake,  Piute 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1929,  was  born 
Feb.  20,  1891,  at  Junction,  Piute  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  James  Willard  Bay 
and  Mary  Eva  LeBaron.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  2,  1899,  ordained  an  Elder 
May  6,  1922,  by  Marion  King,  filled  a 
mission  to  California  in  1922-1924, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  31,  1924,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

DAY,  Daniel,  Bishop  of  the  Marion 
Ward,  Garfield  Stake,  Piute  Co.,  Utah, 
from  1922  to  1927,  was  born  July  8, 
1872,  at  Kanarra,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Day  and  Charlotte  N. 


Clark.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
27,  1920,  by  David  A.  Smith,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Feb.  26,  1922,  by  Ste- 
phen L.  Richards. 

GATES,  Lawrence,  Bishop  of  the 
Antimony  (formerly  Marion)  Ward, 
Garfield  Stake,  Piute  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1927  to  1930 -I- ,  was  born  April  21, 
1893,  at  Escalante,  Garfield  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Hyrum  Gates  and  Rose 
Heaps.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  14,  1902, 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  16,  1916,  by 
Ernest  A.  Griffin,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States  in  1916-1918,  and 
also  filled  a  short  mission  to  the  West- 
ern States  in  1926.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  27, 
1920,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

GEORGE,  Leslie,  Bishop  of  the  Es- 
calante North  Ward,  Garfield  Stake, 
Piute  Co.,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1928, 
was  born  Aug.  18,  1876,  at  Kanosh, 
Millard  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
George  and  Mary  Jane  Prows.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  6,  1884,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  March  15,  1901,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  in  1921. 

GRIFFIN,  Lorenzo  Heber,  Bishop 
of  the  Escalante  North  Ward,  Gar- 
field Stake,  Piute  Co.,  Utah,  from  1928 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  May  17,  1893,  at 
Escalante,  Garfield  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Charles  E.  Griffin  and  Sarah  Eliza- 
beth Jarvis.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty, filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  in  1924-1926,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  17,  1928,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

JORGENSEN,  Elmer  Hans,  Bish- 
op of  the  Widtsoe  Ward,  Garfield 
Stake,  Piute  Co.,  Utah,  from  1918  to 
1920,  was  born  March  10,  1886,  at 
Smithfield,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jacob 
Jorgensen  and  Melvina  M.  Munk.  He 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


475 


was  baptized  May  3,  1894,  in  Smith- 
field,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  22, 
1914,  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  March  2,  1918,  by  George 
Albert  Smith. 

KING,  Thomas  Arthur,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Garfield  Stake  presidency, 
Piute  Co.,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930, 
was  born  Jan.  8,  1889,  at  Coyote,  Gar- 
field Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  C. 
King  and  Elizabeth  Dunsire.  He  was 
baptized  July  3,  1897,  ordained  an  El- 
der July  21,  1909,  by  James  Houston, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1910-1911,  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Aug.  31,  1912,  by  Heber  J.  Grant  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  24,  1912, 
by  John  N.  Henrie.  He  also  filled  a 
short  term  mission  to  California  in 
1925-1926. 

MANGUM.  Corel  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Widtsoe  Ward,  Garfield  Stake,  Pi- 
ute Co.,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1929,  was 
born  April  21,  1883,  at  Pahria,  Kane 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  James  Mangum 
and  Mary  Ann  Smith.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  at 
Pahria,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
3,  1907,  by  Mahonri  M.  Steele,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  30,  1925,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

MEEKS,  James  Orson,  Bishop  of 
Circleville  Ward,  Garfield  Stake,  Pi- 
ute Co.,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1920,  was 
born  Dec.  15,  1881,  at  Orderville, 
Kane  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  H. 
Meeks  and  Mary  Ellen  Dorithy.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  7,  1901,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
22,  1919,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

FINNEY,  Robert  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Widtsoe  Ward,  Garfield  Stake, 
Piute  Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1925, 
was  born  March  29,  1870,  at  Toquer- 
ville,  Washington  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  R.  C.  Pinney  and  Susan  D.  Smith. 
He   was   baptized   in   June,   1879,   or- 


dained a  High  Priest  in  1893,  by  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  27, 
1920,  by  Hyrum   G.   Smith. 

ROWAN,  Charles  Elliot,  jun.,  pres- 
ident of  the  Garfield  Stake,  Garfield 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1930,  was  bom 
Oct.  18,  1885,  at  Coyote,  Garfield  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Charles  Elliot  Rowan 
and  Delilah  King.  He  was  baptized 
Jan.  2,  1894,  ordained  an  Elder  Sept. 
19,  1902,  by  William  King,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1903-1905,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  30,  1916,  by  John  N.  Henrie,  and 
set  apart  as  stake  president  Aug.  29, 
1920,   by    Rudger    Clawson. 

STONEY,  John  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Junction  Ward,  Garfield  Stake, 
Garfield  Co.,  Utah,  from  1914  to  1915, 
was  born  April  3,  1871,  at  Minersville, 
Beaver  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Robert 
Stoney  and  Sarah  Johnson.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  March  2,  1914,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

SUDWEEKS,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Circleville  Ward,  Garfield  Stake,  Gar- 
field Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1927, 
was  born  May  3,  1881,  at  Kingston, 
Garfield  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Rich- 
ard Henry  Sudweeks  and  Hannah  E. 
Gibbs.  He  was  baptized  May  3,  1889, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  28,  1920,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith. 

TWITCHELL,  Milton,  Bishop  of  the 
Estalante  South  Ward,  Garfield  Stake, 
Garfield  Co.,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1923, 
was  born  Dec.  8,  1895,  at  Escalante, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Adelbert  Twitchell 
and  Lucy  Ann  Cottom.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  10,  1905,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  28,  1921, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

WHITTAKER,    James    Lorenzo, 

Bishop  of  the  Cii'cleville  Ward,  Gar- 


476 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


field  Stake,  Garfield  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June  25, 
1891,  at  Circleville,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Taylor  Whittaker  and  Lois  Elzetta 
Barton.  He  was  baptized  June  25,  1918, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  25,  1923, 
by  George  F.  Richards,  who  also  or- 
dained him  a  Bishop  Nov.  27,  1927. 


Granite   Stake 


ALSTON,  Clifford  Molyneaux,  Bish- 
op of  the  Wasatch  Ward,  Granite 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930,  was 
born  Aug.  30,  1882,  in  Dover,  Sanpete 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Christopher  Al- 
ston and  Anna  C.  C.  Smith.  He  was 
baptized  July  12,  1892,  ordained  a 
Seventy  in  1901  by  J.  Golden  Kimball, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1901-1903,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1917  by  Rudger  Clawson, 
and  a  Bishop  June  22,  1927,  by  Pres. 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

ARBUCKLE,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Emerson  Ward,  Granite  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1909  to  1919,  was  born  April 
8,  1859,  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  a  son 
of  James  Arbuckle  and  Agnes  Thomp- 
son. He  was  baptized  in  1867,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Jan.  12,  1902,  by  Ma- 
thias  F.  Cowley,  and  a  Bishop  Feb. 
28,  1909,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

ASHTON,  Marvin  O.,  Bishop  of  the 
Wasatch  Ward,  Granite  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1917  to  1924,  was  born  April  8, 
1883,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,"  the  son 
of  Edward  T.  Ashton  and  Eflfie  W. 
Morris.  He  Avas  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  oixlained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1907-1909,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  22,  1917,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

BEARDALL,  John  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Parleys  Ward,  Granite  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930,  was  born 
Dec.  12,  1868,  in  Calverton,  Notting- 


hamshire, England,  the  son  of  John 
Beardall  and  Sarah  Stevenson.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  April  2,  1924, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

BENNION,  Samuel  Thomas,  Bish- 
op of  the  Nibley  Ward,  Granite  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  26,  1881,  in  Taylorsville,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Hyrum 
Bennion  and  Mary  Karren.  He  was 
baptized  June  5,  1890,  ordained  an 
Elder,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1904-1906,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  7,  1924, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

BLAKE,  Herbert  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Emerson  Ward,  Granite  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1922  to  1926,  was  born  April 
10,  1885,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Thos.  Blake  and  Bettie  Piatt.  He 
was  baptized  May  4,  1893,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  20,  1922,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

BRIMHALL,   David    Davis,    Bishop 

of  the  Emerson  Ward,  Granite  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930,  was  born 
May  23,  1886,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Emer  Myer  Brimhall  and 
Angeline  Davis.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  6,  1896,  ordained  an  Elder  Nov. 
5,  1904,  by  James  Anderson,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Netherlands  in  1907- 
1910,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct. 
18,  1926,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

BURTON,  Carl  Cashing,  Bishop  of 
the  Highland  Park  Ward,  Gx-anite 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  May  16,  1885,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Willard  C.  Burton 
and  Mary  J.  Gardner.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood  and  filled  a  mission 
to  Germany  in  1907-1910.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  27,  1914, 
and  a  Bishop  Nov.  17,  1928,  by  James 
E.  Talmage. 

DRIGGS,  A  polios  G.,  Bishop  of  the 
Sugar    House    Ward,    Granite    Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


477 


Utah,  from  1877  to  1900,  was  born 
Jan.  7,  1841,  in  Ohio.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  27,  1876,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  22,  1877, 
by  Daniel  H.  Wells.  He  died  July  12, 
1918, 

GARDINER,  Clarence  L.,  Bishop  of 
the  Richards  Ward,  Granite  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1928,  was  born 
May  30,  1881,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Robert  Gardiner  and  Mar- 
garet Stewart.  He  was  baptized  July 
7,  1889,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 

25,  1924,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant,  and 
a  Bishop  in  1925  by  John  A.  Widtsoe. 

KJAR,  Joseph  Edward,  Bishop  of 
Parley's  Ward,  Granite  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  July 

26,  1885,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Julius  Kjar  and  Ida  M. 
Jonassen.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  5, 
1893,  ordained  an  Elder,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1905-1907,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Nov.  20,  1929,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

LAFOUNT,  Harold  Arundel,  Bish- 
op of  the  Hawthorne  Ward,  Granite 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1924,  was 
born  Jan.  5,  1880,  in  Birmingham, 
Warwickshire,  England,  the  son  of 
Robert  Arthur  Lafount  and  Ethel 
Hewitt.  He  emigrated  to  America 
when  about  11  years  old  and  was  bap- 
tized March  10,  1893,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1902-1903,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  June  18,  1919,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

LLOYD,  Joseph  Francis,  Bishop  of 
the  Emerson  Ward,  Granite  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1922,  was  born 
June  27,  1876,  in  Wellsville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Thomas  Lloyd  and  Susannah 
Stone.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
June  27,  1919,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

RICHARDS,  LeGrande,  Bishop  of 
the  Sugar  House  Ward,  Granite  Stake, 
Utah,  from    1919   to   1925,  was   born 


Feb.  6,  1886,  in  Farmington,  Utah,  the 
son  of  George  F.  Richards  and  Alice 
A.  Robinson.  He  was  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood  and  filled  two  missions  to 
the  Netherlands  in  1905-1908  and  in 
1914-1916,  presiding  over  the  mission 
during  his  second  term.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by 
Charles  W.  Penrose  June  29,  1919. 

RICHARDS,  Stayner,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Granite  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 -f,  was  born 
Dec.  20,  1885,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Stephen  L.  Richards  and 
Emma  Louise  Stayner.  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  5,  1898,  was  ordained  an 
Elder,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1908-1910,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  24,  1914,  by  George  F. 
Richards,  and  sustained  as  Bishop  of 
the  Highland  Park  Ward  Dec.  3,  1916. 
He  presided  over  the  ward  till  1928, 
when  he  was  called  to  serve  as  second 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency. 

ROCKWOOD,  Julius  Apollos,  Bish- 
op of  the  Richards  Ward,  Granite 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1914  to  1925,  was 
born  March  5,  1878,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Albert  Perry  Rock- 
wood  and  Julia  Sophie  Olsen.  He  was 
baptized  June  6,  1886,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty April  13,  1898,  by  George  Teas- 
dale,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1898-1900,  and  another  one 
to  Great  Britain  in  1907-1909,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  24,  1914,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

SHURTLEFF,  John  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  Parley's  Ward,  Granite  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1924,  was  born 
Sept.  5,  1881,  in  Plain  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Lewis  W.  Shurtleff  and  Emily 
M.  Wainwright.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  5,  1889,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1903-1905,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  July  13,  1921. 

SNELGROVE,  Charles  Rich,  Bish- 
op of  the  Lincoln  Ward,  Granite  Stake, 


478 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  from  1928  to  1930,  was  born 
June  30,  1887,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Charles  Richard  Snelgrove 
and  Emily  Brooksbank.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  6,  1901,  ordained  an  Elder 
March  14,  1926,  by  Shipley  D.  Burton, 
filled  a  mission  to  Canada  in  1926- 
1928,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Dec.  11,  1928,  by  James 
E.  Talmage. 

SPENCER,  George  Sterling,  Bish- 
op of  the  Forest  Dale  Ward,  Granite 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930,  was 
born  Oct.  13,  1870,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Claudius  Victor  Spen- 
cer and  Matilda  Price.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  1,  1882,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Netherlands  in  1894-1896  and  presid- 
ing over  the  mission  five  months.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  29, 
1914,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a 
Bishop  Dec.  24,  1928. 

TAGGART,  Henry  Milton,  Bishop 
of  the  Hawthorne  Ward,  Granite 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 -|-,  was 
born  March  9,  1875,  in  Richville,  Mor- 
gan Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Geo.  Washing- 
ton Taggart  and  Clarissa  Marina 
Rogers.  He  was  baptized  April  8, 
1883,  ordained  a  Seventy  April  19, 
1899,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1899-1901,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  18,  1919,  by  Anthon  H. 
Lund,  and  a  Bishop  March  5,  1924. 

WHEELER,  Thomas  Mark,  Bishop 
of  the  Sugar  House  Ward,  Granite 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  May  8,  1881,  in  Sugar  House, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thom- 
as Wheeler  and  Frances  R.  C,  Elkins. 
He  was  baptized  April  29,  1890,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  3,  1916,  by 
Fi-ank  Y.  Taylor,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1919-1921,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  1,  1925,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 


WOOD,  Alan  Gentry,  Bishop  of  the 
Emerson  Ward,  Granite  Stake,  Utah, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  May  21,  1900,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Wood  and  Ellen  Sutton  Goddard. 
He  was  baptized  June  6,  1908,  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  May  3,  1925,  by 
Rudger  Clawson,  and  acted  as  a  Bish- 
op of  the  24th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
from  1925  to  1928,  and  was  chosen  as 
Bishop  of  the  Emerson  Ward  June  1, 
1930. 


Grant  Stake 


ANDERSON,  Joseph,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Grant  Stake  presidency 
from  1924  to  1933,  was  born  Sept. 
7,  1862,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Andrew  Anderson  and  Anna  Olsen. 
He  was  baptized  in  1870,  ordained  a 
Seventy  Aug.  4,  1884,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young,  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia 
in  1885-1887,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor May  25,  1924. 

ANDERSON,      Alexander      Pyper, 

Bishop  of  the  Waterloo  Ward,  Grant 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930,  was 
born  June  21,  1893,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Henry  J.  Anderson  and 
Elizabeth  Jane  Pyper.  After  being 
ordained  an  Elder  he  filled  a  mission 
to  New  Zealand  in  1920-1922.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  in 
1926  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

BOWLES,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Belvedere  Ward,  Grant  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1929,  was  born  Dec.  28, 
1866,  in  Red  Hill,  Surrey,  England,  a 
son  of  Henry  Bowles  and  Catherine 
Brown.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1888,  was  baptized  that  year,  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Seymour  B.  Young 
March  19,  1893,  filled  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand  in  1893-1897,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  July  22,  1924,  by 
Rudger  Clawson.  He  filled  a  second 
mission  to  New  Zealand  in  1907-1911. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


479 


BURTON,  Henry  Fielding,  Bishop 
of  the  Farmers  Ward,  Grant  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1886  to  1914,  was  born 
Feb.  21,  1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Robert  T.  Burton  and  Sarah 
Anna  Garr.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  12, 
1886,  by  Angus  M.  Cannon.  He  died 
Feb.  16,  1920. 

BUTLER,  Ernest  Leroy,  Bishop  of 
the  Belvedere  Wai-d,  Grant  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930,  was  born 
Feb.  13,  1885,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Myron  W.  Butler  and  Matilda 
Stowell.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  13, 
1893,  ordained  a  Seventy  July  19,  1927, 
filled  two  missions  to  Samoa,  one  in 
1909-1912,  and  another  in  1921-1927, 
part  of  the  time  (1924-1927)  presiding 
over  the  mission,  and  was  sustained  as 
a  Bishop  Jan.  27, 1929.  He  died  March 
17,  1933. 

COOK,  John  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Southgate  Ward,  Grant  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930,  was  born  Dec.  9, 
1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  Cook  and  Mary  Davis.  He 
was  baptized  April  11,  1896,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  8,  1920,  by  Geo. 
E.  Woolley,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  19,  1925, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

FAGG,  Charles  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Wilford  Ward,  Grant  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov. 
27,  1883,  in  East  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the 
son  of  John  Birch  Fagg  and  Caroline 
Esther  Elizabeth  Simper.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  1,  1892,  ordained  a  Seventy 
April  3,  1911,  by  Seymour  B.  Young, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  24,  1913, 
by  Frank  Y.  Taylor  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  11,  1924,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 


Utah,  the  son  of  William  H.  Hill  and 
Mary  Sorensen.  He  was  baptized 
June  10,  1877,  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
April  21,  1903,  by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1903-1905.  He  died  May  6,  1919,  in 
Mill   Creek. 

KASTELER,  Alma,  Bishop  of  the 
Burton  Ward,  Grant  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  May 
9,  1892,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Christian  Kasteler  and  Marie 
Hostetler.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  6, 
1900,  and  after  being  ordained  an  El- 
der Feb.  24,  1913,  he  filled  a  mission  to 
Switzerland,  Germany  and  the  United 
States  in  1913-1915.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  15, 
1929,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

MILLER,  Austin  Porter,  Bishop  of 
the  Miller  Ward,  Grant  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1917  to  1929,  was  born  March 
1,  1888,  in  Riverton,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Orrin  P.  Miller  and  Elizabeth  Ann 
Morgan.  He  was  baptized  May  24, 
1896,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1909-1911,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  18,  1914,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Aug.  26,  1917,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

NEFF,  Eugene  JeflFerson,  Bishop  of 
the  East  Mill  Creek  Ward,  Grant 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  March  29,  1883,  in  East  Mill 
Creek,  a  son  of  Amos  Herr  Neff  and 
Eliza  Annie  Heughes.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  1,  1892,  ordained  an  Elder 
Aug.  14,  1900,  by  James  G.  Smith, 
filled  two  mission  to  Hawaii,  one  in 
1904-1908,  and  another  in  1923-1927 
when  he  presided  over  the  mission. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
August,  1924,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins, 
and  a  Bishop  May  6,   1928. 


HILL,  Abraham  Mormon,  Bishop  of  NICHOLLS,       Samuel       Frederick, 

the  Miller  Ward,  Grant  Stake,  Utah,  Bishop  of  the  McKinley  Ward,  Grant 

from  March  17  to  Nov.  17,  1907,  was  Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930,  was 

born  March  28,   1868,  in  Mill  Creek,  born  Sept.  9,  1894,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 


480 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  the  son  of  Frederick  William 
Nicholls  and  Anna  Johnson.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  28,  1902,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  20,  1922,  by  Frank 
Y.  Taylor,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  1,  1924, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith.  He  was  elected 
auditor  of  Salt  Lake  City  in  1929. 

RICH,  Edward  Stokes,  Bishop  of 
the  East  Mill  Creek  Ward,  Grant 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1929,  was 
born  Dec.  10,  1886,  in  Almo,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Samuel  Rich  and  Mary  Ann 
Stokes.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  31, 
1894,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1905- 
1907,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  8,  1924,  by  Geo.  Al- 
bert Smith. 

RICHARDS,  Silas  Leroy,  Bishop  of 
the  Central  Park  Ward,  Grant  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930,  was  born 
Oct.  25,  1882,  in  Union,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Silas  Newton  Richards  and  Mary 
Norman  Goulder.  He  was  baptized 
March  28,  1893,  ordained  an  Elder 
Nov.  9,  1902,  by  John  A.  Berrett,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1902-1905,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  30,  1914,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  May  23,  1925, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

SHURTLEFF,       Arthur      Thomas, 

Bishop  of  the  Wandamere  Ward, 
Grant  Stake,  Utah,  from  1918  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  April  20,  1882,  in 
Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the  son  of  Harrison 
E.  Shurtleff  and  Cornelia  Frances 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  1,  1904, 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1913- 
1915,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
26,  1917,  by  Frank  Y.  Taylor,  and  a 
Bishop  May  12,  1918,  by  Anthony  W. 
Ivins. 

SODERBORG,  George  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Burton  Ward,  Grant  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1923  to  1929,  was  born  Aug.  7, 
1885,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 


of  Anders  Pontus  Soderborg  and  Au- 
gusta Johnson.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
5,  1893,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
26,  1912,  by  Sylvester  Q.  Cannon,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  20,  1923,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

TOWLER,  Thomas  Edgar,  Bishop 
of  the  Farmers  Ward,  Grant  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1924,  and  of  the 
Whittier  Ward  from  1924  to  1930 -F, 
was  born  Sept,  3,  1885,  in  Mill  Creek, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Daniel  Towler  and 
Sarah  A.  Durnford.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  5,  1893,  ordained  an  Elder  in  1906, 
by  Ben  R.  Eldredge,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1906-1908,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Thos.  J.  Yates 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  10,  1923, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 


Gunnison  Stake 

BARDSLEY,  Leo  Duffin,  second 
counselor  in  the  Gunnison  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1923  to  1924,  was 
born  July  11,  1889,  in  Centerfield,  San- 
pete Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  Bards- 
ley  and  Alice  Duffin.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  May  6,  1923,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

BARTHOLOMEW,  George  Marston, 

Bishop  of  the  Fayette  Ward,  Gunnison 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1930,  was 
born  Aug.  29,  1884,  in  Fayette,  San- 
pete Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  George  M. 
Bartholomew  and  Salena  Roper.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  6,  1892,  ordained 
an  Elder  by  John  Bartholomew  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  and 
Central  States  in  1906-1908,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  4,  1919,  by 
John  Wells  and  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun..  May  6,  1923. 

BARTHOLOMEW,  Henry  Lee,  Bish- 
op of  the  Fayette  Ward,  Gunnison 
Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


481 


1,  1891,  in  Fayette,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Bartholomew  and  Eliza 
R.  Metcalf.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  1, 
1899,  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  26,  1915, 
by  Peter  Chx-istiansen,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Western  States  in  1915-1918, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  5, 
1921,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  who 
also  set  him  apart  as  Bishop  Sept.  14, 
1930. 

CHRISTENSEN,  Hyrum,  Bishop  of 
the  Mayfield  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1906  to  1917,  was  born 
Sept.  26,  1866,  in  Salina,  Sevier  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Peter  C.  and  Ane  Kris- 
tine  Christensen.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  ordained 
a  Seventy  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1898-1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop,  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Mayfield  Ward  April 
7,  1906,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

D  ESP  A  IN,  Charles   Livingston, 

Bishop  of  the  Axtell  Ward,  Gunnison 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1924,  was 
born  Nov.  8,  1874,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Orson  A.  Despain  and 
Janet  Livingston.  He  was  baptized 
June  6,  1883,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  7,  1920,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

FJELDSTED,  Sidney  James,  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Gunnison  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  in  1930  + ,  was  born 
Oct.  19,  1887,  in  Centerfield,  Sanpete 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Andrew  C.  Fjeld- 
sted  and  Matilda  Larson.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  30,  1896,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  5,  1923,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage,  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor March  9,  1930,  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay. 

FRANDSEN,  Peter  LaFayette,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Clarion  Branch, 
Gunnison  Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to 
1925,  and  Bishop  of  the  Clarion  Ward, 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  May  26, 


1885,  in  Mount  Pleasant,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Niels  Peter  Frandsen  and  Caroline 
Simpson.  He  was  baptized  July  5, 
1895,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Aug.  30,  1925,  by  Stephen 
L.   Richards. 

HANSEN,  Charles  Severin,  Bishop 
of  the  Centerfield  Ward,  Gunnison 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1926,  was 
born  March  20,  1891,  in  Centerfield, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Peter  C.  Hansen  and 
Christine  Madsen.  He  was  baptized 
in  1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  6,  1923,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

KIDMAN,  Leslie,  Bishop  of  the 
Gunnison  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930,  was  born 
Jan.  22,  1894,  in  Petersboro,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  A.  Kidman. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  3,  1903,  and  or- 
dained and  set  apart  as  Bishop,  Nov. 
30,  1924. 

LARSON,  Joseph  Arthur,  Bishop  of 
the  Hamilton  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1925,  was  born 
Dec.  18,  1874,  in  Gunnison,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  Larson  and  Anna  Erick- 
son.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1883, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  6,  1923, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Aug.  3,  1923,  by  James  E. 
Talmage. 

NIELSEN,  Carl  Erastus,  Bishop  of 
the  Axtell  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
from  1915  to  1920,  was  born  Feb.  13, 
1887,  in  Scipio,  Utah,  a  son  of  Hans 
W.  Nielsen  and  Magdelene  Rasmus- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  3,  1895, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  3,  1912, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Orson  F.  Wliitney  Jan.  31, 
1915. 

OLSEN,  Hans  Christensen,  Bishop 

of  the  Hamilton  Ward,  Gunnison 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1927,  was 
born  Sept.  11,  1880,  in  Ephraim,  Utah, 


Vol.  IV,  No.  31 


Aug.   1,  1936 


482 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


a  son  of  James  Olsen  and  Annie  Cath- 
erine Christensen.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  1,  1924,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard, and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  30, 
1925,   by    Stephen   L.    Richards, 

OLSEN,  Ole  Christoffer,  Bishop  of 
the  Mayfield  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1890,  was  born 
Feb.  7,  1825,  on  the  island  of  Born- 
holm,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Ole  C.  Olsen 
and  Engel  M.  Kolber.  He  was  baptized 
March  15,  1852,  ordained  an  Elder 
April  6,  1853,  presided  over  the  Co- 
penhagen Branch  in  1853-1857,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1857,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1867-1869,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  in  June,  1877, 
by  Orson  Hyde.  He  died  March  15, 
1906,  at  Mayfield. 

PARK,  Allen  Eugene,  president  of 
the  Gunnison  Stake,  Utah,  from  1923 
to  1930,  was  born  Oct.  5,  1885,  in  Mill 
Creek,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Allen  Thomas  Park  and  Jane  Lunn. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  6,  1923,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

PETERSEN,  Christian  Andreas, 

Bishop  of  the  Centerfield  Ward,  Gun- 
nison Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  March  24,  1880,  in 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Chris- 
tian Petersen  and  Johanne  Pedersen. 
He  was  baptized  Dec.  28,  1891,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1897,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  4,  1918,  by  Rudger 
Clawson  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Nov.  29,  1927,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

RASMUSSEN,  Charles  Alma,  first 
counselor  in  the  Gunnison  Stake  pres- 
idency, Utah,  from  1923  to  1926.  was 
born  April  2,  1889,  in  Ephraim,  San- 
pete Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Rasmus  Ras- 
mussen  and  Hannah  Cooper.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  1,  1899,  and  was  ordain- 


ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  6, 
1923,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

RASMUSSEN,  James,  Bishop  of 
the  Gunnison  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1915,  was  born 
Oct.  1,  1877,  in  Ephraim,  Sanpete  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Rasmus  Jensen  Ras- 
mussen  and  Ingeborg  Olsen.  He  was 
baptized  May  6,  1886,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1906-1909,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  5,  1912,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

SORENSEN,  Orion  Genial,  Bishop 
of  the  Axtell  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  June  28, 
1897,  in  Ephraim,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Niels  Peter  and  Amelia  So- 
phie Sorensen.  He  was  baptized  July 
15,  1915,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
10,  1929,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  14,  1930,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

SORENSEN,  Peter  Marlin,  Bishop 

of  the  Axtell  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1915,  was  born 
Aug.  29,  1888,  in  Ephraim,  Sanpete 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Niels  Peter  and 
Amelia  Sophie  Sorensen,  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  7,  1897,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  3,  1912, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

WHITLOCK,  Charles  Clyde,  Bishop 
of  the  Mayfield  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1929,  was  born 
Dec.  29,  1882,  in  Ephraim,  Sanpete 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  Whitlock 
and  Anne  E.  Peterson.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  10,  1891,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  5,  1923,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May  30, 
1926,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

WHITLOCK,  Royal,  Bishop  of  the 
Axtell  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1930,  was  born  April  25, 
1894,  in  Mayfield,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  George  Q.  Whitlock  and  Ma- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


483 


tilda  Bunderson.  He  was  baptized  May 
10,  1904,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
6,  1923,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov. 
30,  1924,  both  ordinations  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  jun. 

WILLARDSEN,    Willard    Franklin, 

Bishop  of  the  Mayfield  Ward,  Gunni- 
son Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1926, 
was  born  Dec.  19,  1876,  in  Ephraim, 
Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Willard 
Willardsen  and  Mary  Ann  Thorston. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1886,  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  Feb.  15,  1904,  by  Joseph 
W.  McMurrin,  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1914-1915,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  6,  1923, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

WILLARDSEN,  Albertus,  Bishop  of 
the  Mayfield  Ward,  Gunnison  Stake, 
from  1917  to  1920,  was  born  July  27, 
1891,  in  Ephraim,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Joseph  Willardsen  and  Anna 
Forester.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  15, 
1899,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1911-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  6,  1917,  by 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 


Hollywood  Stake 

BROWN,  William  George,  Bishop 
of  the  Mar  Vista  Ward,  Hollywood 
Stake,  California,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  10,  1897,  in  Evanston, 
Wyoming,  the  son  of  James  Brown 
and  Christina  Hunter.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  15,  1905,  ordained  an  Elder 
Feb.  5,  1917,  by  Albert  W.  Phips,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  California  in  1919- 
1922.  He  was  called  to  act  as  Los  An- 
geles Stake  Clerk  in  1923,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  26,  1928,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards. 

CHENEY,  David  Pierce,  Bishop  of 
the  Boyle  Heights  Ward,  Hollywood 
Stake,  California,  in  1923,  was  born 
July  10,  1879,  in  Springville,  Utah,  a 


son  of  David  Cheney  and  Lodena 
Hutchings.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  4, 
1887,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  March  11, 
1923,  by  Heber  J.  Grant.  He  acted  in 
this  capacity  until  Aug.  26,  1923,  when 
the  ward  was  divided  and  he  became 
Bishop  of  the  Belvedere  Ward,  Los 
Angeles  Stake,  Califoi'nia. 

CORBRIDGE,  John  T.,  Bishop  of 
the  Santa  Monica  Ward,  Hollywood 
Stake,  California,  from  1928  to  1930, 
was  born  Oct.  21,  1880,  in  Bountiful, 
Utah,  the  son  of  W.  H.  Corbridge  and 
Emma  Howard.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
17,  1895,  ordained  a  Seventy  May  7, 
1900,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Society  Islands  in 
1900-1904.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  25,  1923,  by  Pres.  Heber 
J.  Grant,  who  also  ordained  him  a 
Bishop  Feb.  26,  1928. 

COVINGTON,  Joseph  W.,  Bishop  of 
Lankershim  Ward,  Hollywood  Stake, 
California,  from  1928  to  1929,  was 
born  Aug.  8,  1879,  in  Orderville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  T.  Covington  and  Jo- 
hanna Lundblad.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
13,  1887,  ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
22,  1923,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith,  and  a 
Bishop  Jan.  29,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

COX,  Solomon  Lindsay,  jun.,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Redondo  Branch, 
Hollywood  Stake,  California,  from 
1926  to  1928,  was  born  March  14,  1862, 
in  Lehi,  Utah,  the  son  of  Solomon  L. 
Cox  and  Lucy  Mack  Smith.  He  was 
baptized  Dec.  15,  1873,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  John  C.  Cutler,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Jan.  21,  1926,  by  Geo.  W. 
McCune. 

FARNSWORTH,  Edward  W.,  Bish- 
op of  the  Glendale  Ward,  Hollywood 
Stake,  California,  from  1927  to  1928, 
was  born  Oct.  7,  1885,  in  Coalville, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  W.  Farnswoi-th 
and  Elizabeth  A.  Willmot.  He  was 
baptized   July   15,   1894,   ordained   an 


484 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Elder  March  17,  1908,  by  James  Cal- 
derwood,  a  High  Priest,  Nov.  18,  1923, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  a  Bishop 
Feb.  10,  1927,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

GOUGH,  William  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Glendale  Ward,  Hollywood  Stake,  Cal- 
ifornia, from  1923  to  1927,  was  born 
June  12,  1875,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Joseph  Holland  Gough  and  Mary 
J.  Stone.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old  and  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1898.  He 
went  to  California  in  1923  from  Idaho 
Falls,  Idaho,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Nov.  11,  1923,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

HOGLUND,  Alvin  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Garvanza  Ward,  Hollywood  Stake, 
California,  from  1923  to  1930,  was 
born  Jan.  26,  1893,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Otto  Hoglund  and 
Anna  C.  Jacobson.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  31,  1903,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  12,  1923,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

HOWELLS,  David  Parrish,  Bishop 

of  the  Wilshire  Ward,  Hollywood 
Stake,  California,  from  1927  to 
1930-}-,  was  born  March  19,  1884,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  F.  Howells  and  Mary  B.  Par- 
rish. He  was  baptized  May  2,  1892, 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  in 
1906-1908,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  8,  1925,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard, 
and  a  Bishop  March  31,  1928,  by  Apos- 
tle Ballard. 

JACK  MAN,  Wallace  A.,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Elysian  Park  Branch 
(formerly  Edendale  Branch),  Holly- 
wood Stake,  California,  from  1927  to 
1929,  was  born  Oct.  20,  1888,  at  Jo- 
seph, Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Levi 
H.  Jackman  and  Sarah  E.  Hatch.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1897,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  19,  1908,  and  set 
apart  as  presiding  Elder  Sept.  1,  1927, 
by  Geo.  W.  McCune. 


KIDMAN,  Lewis  Rudolph,  presiding 

Elder  of  the  Redondo  Branch,  Holly- 
wood Stake,  California,  in  1930,  was 
born  May  8,  1892,  in  Petersboro,  Utah, 
the  son  of  William  Kidman,  jun.,  and 
Elizabeth  Petersen.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Jan.  10,  1932,  by  Chas, 
H.  Norberg. 

LARSON,  Andrew  Olof,  Bishop  of 
the  Alhambra  Ward,  Hollywood  Stake, 
California,  from  1923  to  1928,  was 
born  Sept.  11,  1887,  in  Molen,  Emery 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Niels  C.  Larson. 
He  was  baptized  in  1897,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  12, 
1923,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

MARTINDALE,  Alvin,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Elysian  Park  Branch, 
Hollywood  Stake,  California,  from 
1929  to  1930 -f,  was  born  Dec.  4,  1899, 
in  St.  George,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Albert  Martindale  and  Elizabeth  Jane 
Wright.  He  was  baptized  July  10, 
1910,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept. 

11,  1927,  by  C.  B.  Steward. 

McCARDELL,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Inglewood  Ward,  Hollywood  Stake, 
California,  from  1924  to  1926,  was 
born  May  21,  1888,  at  Nephi,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  McCardell  and  Mar- 
garet Fowles.  He  was  baptized  July 

12,  1905,  ordained  a  High  Priest  July 
27,  1924,  by  Wm.  J.  Reeves,  and  a 
Bishop  Nov.  9,  1924,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

MORTENSEN,     Jesse     Leonidas, 

Bishop  of  the  Lankershim  Ward,  Hol- 
lywood Stake,  California,  from  1929 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  April  21,  1873, 
in  Parowan,  Utah,  the  son  of  Hans  J. 
Mortensen  and  Emily  Dionitia  Alex- 
ander. He  was  baptized  June  2,  1881, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  14,  1897,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1897-1899. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
4,  1894,  by  Levi  P.  Helm,  and  a  Bish- 
op April  21,  1918;  by  Richard  R.  Ly- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


485 


man.  Before  moving  to  California  he 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Amalga  Ward, 
Benson  Stake,  Utah,  in  1918-1925. 

MYLER,  Lorenzo,  third  Bishop  of 
the  Inglewood  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  from  1927  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept.  9,  1897,  at  Dia- 
mond, Juab  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  John 
Alfred  Keyte  and  Louise  M.  Rose.  He 
was  baptized  Jan.  30,  1908,  and  or- 
dained a  Deacon  Nov.  13,  1911,  by  B. 
F.  Tanner;  later  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  acted  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  James  McCardell  of 
the   Inglewood   Ward. 

PAUL,  Edmund  R.,  Bishop  of  the 
Lankershim  Ward,  Hollywood  Stake, 
California,  from  1924  to  1928,  was 
born  April  10,  1879,  at  Mendon,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Walter  Paul  and  Emma 
Westover.  He  was  baptized  May  5, 
1887,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept. 
27,  1924,  by  Geo.  W.  McCune. 

PETERSON,  Angus  Elmer,  Bish- 
op of  the  Hollywood  Ward,  Hollywood 
Stake,  California,  from  1928  to 
1930 -f-,  was  born  July  16,  1884,  in 
Lehi,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  R.  Peter- 
son and  Agnes  E.  Sorensen.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  20,  1893,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  11,  1923,  by  Pres. 
Heber  J.  Grant,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op July  14,  1928,  by  Richard  R.  Ly- 
man. 

PRATT,  Mathoni  M.,  Bishop  of  the 
Lankershim  Ward,  Hollywood  Stake, 
California,  in  1929,  was  born  Feb.  11, 
1890,  in  Helper,  Utah,  the  son  of  Te- 
ancum  Pratt  and  Annie  E.  Mead.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  11,  1898,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Sept.  27,  1924,  by  Sam- 
uel Dailey,  and  a  Bishop  March  31, 
1929. 

ROSKELLEY,  Marriner  W.,  Bishop 
of  the  Alhambra  Ward,  Hollywood 
Stake,  California,  from  1928  to  1930  + , 
was  born  Aug.  11,  1888,  in  Smithfield, 


Utah,  the  son  of  Samuel  Roskelley 
and  Sarah  Maud  Burton.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  1,  1896,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1911-1913,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Jan.  29,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

RYCKMAN,  Lloyd  Mason,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Redondo  Branch,  Holly- 
wood Stake,  California,  from  1928  to 
1930,  was  born  March  25,  1892,  at 
Shier,  Michigan,  the  son  of  Albert  Jo- 
seph Ryckman  and  Mabel  M.  Mason. 
He  was  baptized  May  3,  1924,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Jan.  31,  1926, 
by  John  F.  Corbridge. 

SCONBERG,  Arthur  H.,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Hollywood  Stake  presi- 
dency, California,  from  1929  to  1930, 
was  born  Jan.  29,  1880,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Henry  Scon- 
berg  and  Emma  Johnson.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  2,  1888,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug.  28,  1927,  by  David 
O.  McKay. 

SCOTT,  Rulon  S.,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Pasadena  Branch,  Hollywood 
Stake,  California,  from  1925  to  1930, 
was  born  Oct.  12,  1892,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  He  presided  over  the  Pas- 
adena Branch  six  years,  and  died 
Oct.  2,  1933. 

SKINNER,  Clawson  Nephi,  Bishop 
of  the  Boyle  Heights  Ward,  Holly- 
wood Stake,  California,  from  1923  to 
1928,  was  born  May  21,  1899,  in  Nou- 
nan,  Bear  Lake  Co.,  Idaho,  the  son 
of  Nephi  A,  Skinner  and  Etta  Mae 
Morgan.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  4,  1907, 
moved  to  California  in  1923,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  11,  1923,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

SORENSEN,  Elick  Joseph,  Bishop 
of  the  Mar  Vista  Ward,  Hollywood 
Stake,  California,  from  1928  to  1930, 
was  born  Nov.  15,  1891,  in  Bear  River 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Soren- 
sen and  Selena  Sohlean.  He  was  bap- 


486 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


tized  May  6,  1900,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1928  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

STEWART,  Melbourne  Clair,  Bish- 
op of  the  Hollywood  Ward,  Hollywood 
Stake,  Califomia,  from  1923  to  1927, 
was  bom  April  2,  1890,  in  Kanab, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Alonzo  L.  Stewai-t 
and  Martha  Elzadia  Averett.  He  was 
baptized  in  July,  1914,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  September,  1919,  by  Hyrum 
M.  Smith,  and  a  Bishop  March  11, 
1923,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

STOHL,  David  Oscar,  Bishop  of  the 
Ocean  Park  Ward,  Hollywood  Stake, 
California,  from  1923  to  1928,  was 
born  Oct.  15,  1882,  at  Brigham  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Ola  N.  Stohl  and 
Christina  Johnson.  He  was  baptized 
May  7,  1891,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  19,  1923,  by 
Pi-es.  Heber  J.   Gi'ant. 

VORKINK,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Glendale  Ward,  Hollywood  Stake,  Cal- 
ifornia, from  1928  to  1930,  was  born 
Feb.  12,  1890,  at  Dordrecht,  Holland, 
the  son  of  Hendrik  G.  Vorkink  and 
Johanna  B.  Gobel.  He  was  baptized 
July  19,  1901,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  27,  1919,  by  Charles  W.  Penrose, 
and  a  Bishop  July  15,  1928,  by  Rich- 
ard R.  Lyman. 

WESTOVER,  Lewis  Esper,  presi- 
dent of  the  El  Segunda  Branch,  Holly- 
wood Stake,  California,  from  1929  to 
1930 -h,  was  born  March  10,  1890,  in 
Sanfoi'd,  Colorado,  the  son  of  Lewis 
Burton  Westover  and  Eliza  Jane  Funk. 
He  was  baptized  March  10,  1898,  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Society  Islands  in  1912- 
1915. 


Hyrum  Stake 


ALLEN,  Albert  Silas,  third  Bishop 
of  the  Hyrum  1st  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 


Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930, 
was  born  Sept.  13,  1878,  in  Hy- 
rum, Utah,  the  son  of  Albert  J.  Allen 
and  Finnetta  A.  Williams.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  4,  1886,  by  Andrew  A. 
Allen,  and  taking  an  active  part  in 
Chuixh  affairs  from  his  early  youth, 
he  was  ordained  successively  to  the 
offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and  Elder. 
He  received  a  common  school  educa- 
tion in  Hyrum.  In  1905  (Feb.  5)  he 
married  Margaret  M.  Nielsen  in  the 
Logan  Temple.  This  union  has  been 
blessed  with  four  children,  namely, 
Albert  Merlan,  Wendall  Gale,  Andrew 
Thale  and  Alton  Clain.  Brother  Allen 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  22,  1907, 
by  Alva  B.  Wilson,  and  later  acted  as 
a  president  of  the  62nd  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. He  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain in  1915-1918,  laboring  in  the  Man- 
chester and  Scottish  Conferences.  Af- 
ter returning  home,  he  served  as  sec- 
ond assistant  in  the  Hyrum  Stake 
Sunday  School  organization,  and  was 
for  many  years  a  teacher  in  the  local 
Sunday  School.  He  was  sustained  as 
Bishop  of  the  Hyrum  1st  Ward  Oct. 
19,  1924,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  27,  1925,  by 
Patriarch  Hyrum  G.  Smith.  Brother 
Allen  followed  the  trade  of  a  car- 
penter for  many  years,  and  since  1920 
he  has  been  custodian  of  the  South 
Cache  High  School,  located  at  Hyrum. 

ANDERSON,  John  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Mendon  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1900  to  1903,  Bishop 
of  the  Logan  4th  Ward  from  1913  to 
1919,  and  president  of  the  Swedish 
mission  from  1925  to  1926,  was  bom 
Sept.  24,  1864,  at  Logan,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Johannes  Anderson 
and  Johanna  Olson.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  3,  1896,  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
26,  1900,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

BANKHEAD,  Evan  Haslem,  Bishop 
of  the   Wellsville   2nd   Ward,  Hyrum 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


487 


Stake,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  19,  1895,  at 
Wellsville,  Utah,  the  son  of  Heber  K. 
Bankhead  and  Rachel  Haslem.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  5,  1903,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Jan.  8,  1928,  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball, and  filled  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States  in  1921-1923.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec. 
15,  1929,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

BICKMORE,     Danford     McArthur, 

president  of  the  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Jan.  3,  1875,  at  Wellsville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  David  N.  Bickmore  and  Eliz- 
abeth McArthur.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  ordained 
a  Seventy  June  15,  1898,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States  in  1898-1900,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  18,  1920,  by  Mel- 
vin  J.  Ballard,  and  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Hyrum  Stake  Sept.  30, 
1928,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

BITTERS,  Franklin,  Bishop  of  the 
Millville  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  March  10,  1897,  at  Logan,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Frangott  Bitters 
and  Bertha  Grelett.  He  was  baptized 
March  28,  1905,  ordained  an  Elder  in 
March,  1918,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1918-1920,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  16,  1929,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

BRENCHLEY,  John  Clegg,  second 
counselor  in  the  pi'esidency  of  the  Hy- 
rum Stake,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1928 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  3,  1875,  at 
Wellsville,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Richard  Brenchley  and  Mary  J. 
Clegg.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  3,  1883, 
ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  31,  1899,  by 
William  H.  Maughan,  filled  a  mission 
to  Illinois  in  1900,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  15,  1920,  by  George  F. 
Richards,  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  Hy- 


rum Stake  Sept.  30,  1928,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards. 

CHRISTENSEN,  James  G.,  Bishop 
of  the  Hyrum  3rd  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 -h, 
was  born  March  20,  1884,  at  Hyrum, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Niels  C.  Christensen 
and  Karen  Maria  Sorensen.  He  was 
baptized  May  4,  1892,  at  Hyrum,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Sept.  20,  1909,  by 
Charles  H.  Hart,  filled  a  mission  to 
Scandinavia  in  1909-1912,  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  July  22,  1917,  by 
James  E.  Talmage,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Jan.  13,  1924,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

CHRISTIANSEN,  Lars  Peter,  Bish- 
op of  the  Mount  Sterling  Ward,  Hy- 
rum Stake,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1903  to  1906,  was  born  Dec.  25,  1857, 
at  Gjerlev,  Soro  Amt,  Sjalland,  Den- 
mark, the  son  of  Peter  Christiansen 
and  Anna  Petersen.  He  was  baptized 
March  15,  1863,  at  Hyrum,  Utah, 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1893- 
1895,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
22,  1903,  by  Rudger  Clawson.  He  died 
Feb.  16,  1936. 

CHUGG,  Nathaniel  B.,  Bishop  of 
the  Nibley  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 -F,  was 
born  Aug.  8,  1888,  at  Providence, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
Chugg  and  Eliza  Fredrick.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  2,  1896,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  April  13,  1924,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec. 
16,  1929,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

CLAWSON,  Edwin,  Bishop  of  the 
Hyrum  2nd  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Dec.  21,  1888,  at  Logan, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Carl  John 
Clawson  and  Hedda  Mathilda  Ander- 
son. He  was  baptized  Sept.  2,  1899, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  20,  1909,  by 
Charles  H.  Hart,  filled  a  mission  to 


488 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Great  Britain  in  1911-1913,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
April  22,  1922,  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

FACER,  James  Jarvis,  Bishop  of 
the  Hyrum  3rd  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1907  to  1917, 
was  born  June  10,  1866,  at  Willard, 
Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  George 
Facer  and  Sarah  Thompson.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  7,  1876,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Nov,  16,  1898,  by  George  Rey- 
nolds, filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1898-1900,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  4,  1904,  by  David 
Murray,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
25,  1904,  by  Francis  M,  Lyman. 

GARDNER,  John  Alfred,  Bishop  of 
the  Mendon  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1925, 
was  born  Aug.  27,  1878,  at  Mendon, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Alfred  Gardner  and 
Mary  E.  Coon.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
27,  1886,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
15,  1910,  by  William  H.  Maughan  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  24,  1921,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HENDRY,  John  Jones,  Bishop  of 
the  Wellsville  1st  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930, 
was  born  April  28,  1884,  at  Wellsville, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Michael  Hendry  and 
Mary  Jane  Jones.  He  was  baptized 
June  2,  1892,  ordained  a  Seventy  Aug. 
24,  1921,  by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1906-1908, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March  24, 
1929,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Dec.  16,  1929,  by 
George  Albert  Smith. 

HUGHES,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Mendon  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1872  to  1900,  was  born 
Dec.  25,  1825,  at  Mold,  Trinshin,  North 
Wales,  the  son  of  Robert  Hughes  and 
Martha  Reed.  He  was  baptized  July 
2,  1850,  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1869, 
filled  a  mission  to  Wales  in  1873-1875, 


and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct,  7, 
1872,  by  Pres,  Brigham  Young.  He 
died  Dec.  8,  1919. 

ISRAELSON,  John  A.,  first  counse- 
lor in  the  presidency  of  the  Hyrum 
Stake,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  March  23,  1886,  at 
Hyrum,  Utah,  the  son  of  Andrew  M, 
Isi-aelsen  and  Boletta  Wilson.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  10,  1912,  by 
J.  Golden  Kimball,  filled  a  mission  to 
Norway  in  1905-1907,  and  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  in  the  Hyrum 
Stake  presidency  Sept.  30,  1928,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

JACKSON,  Alma  Obray,  sen.,  Bish- 
op of  the  Avon  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1906  to  1926, 
was  born  July  24,  1851,  at  Council 
Bluffs,  Iowa,  the  son  of  Henry  C. 
Jackson  and  Ann  Oades.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  16,  1906,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney.  He  died  April  30, 
1934. 

JACKSON,  Alma  Obray,  jun..  Bish- 
op of  the  Avon  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  5,  1879,  at  Paradise,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Alma  O.  Jackson  and 
Emma  Jane  Obray.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  1908,  by  Brigham  H.  Rob- 
ei-ts,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1904-1907,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  in  June, 
1930,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

JOHNSON,    John    Eugene,    Bishop 

of  the  Nibley  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1929, 
was  born  Feb.  23,  1881,  at  Hyrum, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  Johnson  and 
Jane  Curtis.  He  was  baptized  March 
7,  1889,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  April  13,  1924,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


JORGENSEN,  Nicholai,  Bishop  of 
the  Hyrum  3rd  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1924, 
was  born  June  4,  1879,  in  Kostf  jorden, 
Trondenes  Prastegjald,  Tromso  amt, 
Norway,  the  son  of  Israel  Jorgensen 
and  Anna  Dorthea  Olsen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  1,  1887,  in  Hyrum,  Utah, 
ordained  an  Elder  by  Andrew  M.  Is- 
raelsen,  filled  a  mission  to  Norway  in 
1904-1906,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  July  23,  1922,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith. 

KERR,  John  Bankhead,  Bishop  of 
the  Wellsville  2nd  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1929, 
was  born  Jan.  28,  1888,  at  Wellsville, 
Utah,  the  son  of  David  A.  Kerr  and 
Malinda  Bankhead.  He  was  baptized 
April  1,  1896,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1909-1912,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  18, 
1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

LILJENQUIST,      Harold      Fritjof, 

Bishop  of  the  Hyrum  1st  Ward,  Hy- 
rum Stake,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1901  to  1913,  was  born  Jan.  19,  1857, 
at  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  the  son  of 
Ola  N.  Liljenquist  and  Christine  Ja- 
cobsen.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
nine  years  old,  at  Hyrum,  Utah,  filled 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1890-1892, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  26,  1901,  by  Marriner  W. 
Merrill.  He  died  Jan.  14,  1936. 

MURRAY,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Mount  Stirling  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1906  to  1913, 
was  born  Feb.  23,  1849,  at  Crofthead, 
Linlithgowshire,  Scotland,  the  son  of 
Robert  Murray  and  Jessie  Archibald. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  twelve 
years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  Scotland 
in  1889-1891,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op April  9,  1906,  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. He  died  March  21,  1913. 

NIELSEN,  Niels  Joseph,  Bishop  of 
the  Hyrum  3rd  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 


Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1901  to  1909, 
was  born  May  3,  1859,  in  East  Weber, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Niels  B.  and  Mar- 
garet D.  Nielsen.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
15,  1868,  ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  30, 
1882,  by  A.  B.  Nielsen,  filled  one  mis- 
sion to  Nebraska  and  one  to  Montana 
in  1898,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  26,  1901,  by  Marriner  W.  Mer- 
rill, and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  22, 
1901,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund.  He  died 
June  10,  1936. 

NUHN,  George  Christian,  Bishop 
of  the  Avon  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1930, 
was  born  Jan.  10,  1890,  at  San  Fran- 
cisco, California,  the  son  of  George  C. 
Nuhn  and  Vilate  Cole,  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  16,  1910,  ordained  an  Elder 
March  11,  1910,  by  Heber  J.  Grant, 
filled  a  mission  to  Holland  in  1910- 
1912,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  April  18,  1920,  by  David 
O.  McKay. 

OWEN,  Evan  Richard,  Bishop  of  the 
Wellsville  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1900  to  1909,  was  born 
June  14,  1867,  at  Wellsville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Evan  Owen  and  Elizabeth  Wal- 
ters. He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy 
July  9,  1897,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1897-1899,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  25,  1900,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

SCOTT,  Ernest  Royal,  Bishop  of  the 
Millville  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1929,  was  born 
Oct.  8,  1876,  in  Millville,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  William  Scott  and  Fanny  M. 
Ellis.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  7,  1886, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  16,  1908,  by 
Charles  H.  Hart,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States  in  1911-1913,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op April  18,  1920,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

SHUMWAY,  Andrew  Purley,  Bish- 
op of  the  Mendon  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 


490 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1859  to  1869, 
was  born  Feb.  20,  1833,  at  Millbury, 
Worcester  Co.,  Massachusetts,  the  son 
of  Charles  Shumway  and  Julia  Ann 
Hooker.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
nine  years  old,  by  Joseph  Smith,  the 
Prophet,  filled  two  missions  to  Eng- 
land in  1856-1858  and  in  1869-1871, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  19, 
1859,  by  Orson  Hyde.  He  died  June 
12,  1909. 

SLOAN,  John  Samuel,  Bishop  of 
the  Mount  Stirling  Ward,  H  y  r  u  m 
Stake,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1913  to 
1915,  was  born  July  6,  1879,  at  Park 
City,  Summit  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
A.  Hugh  Russell  Sloan  and  Margaret 
Reid.  He  was  baptized  in  August,  1887, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  13,  1912, 
by  Oleen  N.  Stohl,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  April  19,  1913. 

SORENSEN,  Henry  Charles,  Bish- 
op of  the  Mendon  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 -f, 
was  born  Feb.  6,  1886,  at  Mendon, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Isaac  Sorensen  and 
Mary  (Marie)  Jacobsen.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Jan.  24,  1912,  by 
Chas.  H.  Hart,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  in  1915-1917,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  28,  1925,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

WHITE,  Joseph  Barnard,  president 
of  the  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1928,  was  born  Jan.  15, 
1882,  at  Ogden,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Barnard  White  and  Sarah  Jane 
Fife.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  15,  1890, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1913-1915,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  April,  1920,  and  was  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  Hyrum  Stake  July 
18,  1920,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

WILLIE,  Allen  LeRoy,  Bishop  of 
the  Mendon  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1921, 
was  born  Jan.  11,  1889,  at  Mendon, 


Utah,  the  son  of  John  S.  Willie  and 
Eliza  Hunsaker.  He  was  baptized  July 
17,  1898,  ordained  an  Elder  in  August, 
1911,  by  Andrew  M.  Israelsen,  filled 
a  mission  to  Germany  in  1911-1914, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  April  18,  1920,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

YEATES,  Alma,  Bishop  of  the  Nib- 
ley  Ward,  Hyrum  Stake,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1924,  was  born 
May  31,  1881,  in  Millville,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  Frederick  Yeates  and 
Sarah  Webb.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
1,  1889,  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  28, 
1910,  by  Charles  H.  Hart,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northwestern  States  in 
1911-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  18,  1920,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 


Idaho  Stake 


BALLS,  Kenneth  Grant,  Bishop  of 
the  Soda  Springs  Ward,  Idaho  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  29,  1892,  at  Soda  Springs,  Ida- 
ho, a  son  of  Daniel  Balls  and  Eliza 
Davis.  He  was  baptized  June  30,  1900, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Nov.  17,  1929,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

BANKS,  David  Albert,  Bishop  of 
the  Ivins  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1923  to  1929,  was  born  April  27, 
1888,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  David  A.  Banks  and  Barbara 
Creer.  He  was  baptized  July  19,  1896, 
was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1907-1910,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  15,  1915,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

BIGLER,  James,  Bishop  of  the  Da- 
visville  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1917  to  1919,  was  born  March  24, 
1866,  in  Nephi,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Jacob  G.  Bigler  and  Amy  Loretta 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


491 


Chase.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  an  Elder,  Seventy 
and  High  Priest  successively,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Feb.  23,  1917,  by  Hy- 
fum  M.  Smith. 

CORBETT,  Joseph  Frederick,  Bish- 
op of  the  Bancroft  Ward,  Idaho  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1918  to  1925,  was  born 
Oct.  3,  1883,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Joseph  E.  Corbett  and  Louisa 
E.  Gon-inge.  He  was  baptized  in  May, 
1892,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1905-1907,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  7,  1908,  by  William  H.  Menden- 
hall,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  March  2, 
1918,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

GREER,  Morris,  Bishop  of  the  Lund 
Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho,  in  1930 +  , 
was  born  Feb.  10,  1881,  in  Spanish 
Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wil- 
lard  Orson  Creer  and  Emma  E.  Rob- 
ertson. He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1889, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  17,  1929, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  May  18,  1930,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

FISHER,  George  Howard,  Bishop 
of  the  Bancroft  Ward,  Idaho  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1907  to  1918,  was  born 
Dec.  5,  1872,  in  Richmond,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  F.  Fisher  and 
Millennium  Andrus.  He  was  baptized 
Aug,  3,  1882,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich 
Islands  in  1893-1896,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  11, 
1907,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

GILBERT,  James  Harris,  Bishop  of 
the  Bancroft  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1925  to  1929,  was  born  Dec. 
8,  1883,  in  Twin  Creeks,  Uinta  Co., 
Wyoming,  a  son  of  Jesse  Gilbert  and 
Mary  Ann  Harris.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  2,  1892,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  26,  1917,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun.,  who  also  ordained  him  a  Bishop 
Nov.  22,  1925. 


GUMMERSALL,   George   Hodgson, 

Bishop  of  the  Ivins  Ward,  Idaho  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1922  to  1923,  was  born 
April  24,  1887,  in  Franklin,  Idaho,  a 
son  of  Smith  Gummersall  and  Phebe 
Hodgson.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  24, 
1895,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  2, 
1918,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  March  4,  1922,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

HATCH,  Asa  Foulds,  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Kelly  Branch,  Idaho  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
Nov.  20,  1899,  in  Hatch,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  Thomas  Asa  Hatch  and  Sarah  Eliz- 
abeth Parkin.  He  was  baptized  May 
3,  1908,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
in  1923-1925,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  17,  1929,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

HATCH,  John  Leonard,  Bishop  of 
the  Hatch  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1926  to  1930  + ,  was  born  May  1, 
1889,  in  Chesterfield,  Bannock  Co., 
Idaho,  a  son  of  Thomas  A.  Hatch  and 
Sarah  Parkin.  He  was  baptized  May  1, 
1897,  oi'dained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1911-1913,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  4,  1921,  by  Nelson  J.  Hogan,  and 
sustained  a  Bishop  July  4,  1926. 

HIGGINSON,  William  Lars,  Bish- 
op of  the  Hatch  Ward,  Idaho  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1923  to  1926,  was  born 
Aug.  2,  1894,  in  Hatch,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  William  Young  Higginson  and  So- 
phia Johnson.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 

3,  1902,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 

4,  1921,  by  Keplar  Sessions,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  25,  1923,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

HOGAN,  Joseph  C,  Bishop  of  the 
Hatch  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1921  to  1923,  was  born  Sept.  11,  1892, 
in  Chesterfield,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Nelson 
J.  Hogan  and  Josephine  Bergensen. 
He  was  baptized  in  November,  1900, 


492 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northwestern  States  in 
1913-1915,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Dec.  4,  1921,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 
He  died  Aug.  9,  1923. 

HOGAN,  Nelson  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Hatch  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1902  to  1917,  was  born  Aug.  12,  1860, 
in  Bountiful,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Goudy  Hogan  and  Ann  Nelson.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op July  27,  1902,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

HORSLEY,  Everett  Lee,  Bishop  of 
the  Soda  Springs  Ward,  Idaho  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1927  to  1929,  was  born 
March  21,  1901,  at  Soda  Springs,  Ida- 
ho, a  son  of  Thomas  H.  Horsley  and 
Louisa  Lau.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  2, 
1909,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  May  26,  1928,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

JENKINS,  Lorran  Amos,  Bishop  of 
the  Ivins  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan. 
7,  1892,  in  Newton,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Jenkins  and  Annie 
Clark.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  7,  1900, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Nov.  17,  1929,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

JENSEN,  Benjamin  Denmark,  Bish- 
op of  the  Toponce  Ward,  Idaho  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1921  to  1926,  was  born 
Jan.  16,  1876,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Denmark  Jensen  and  Lucina 
Johnson.  He  was  baptized  when  nine 
years  old,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
was  set  apart  for  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  in  1897,  also  to 
Denmark  in  1907,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  2,  1918,  by  Keplar  Ses- 
sions, and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  4, 
1921,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

JENSEN,  Parley  Pratt,  Bishop  of 
the  Toponce  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1926  to  1930,  was  born  April 
24,  1880,  in  Honeyville,  Box  Elder  Co., 


Utah,  a  son  of  Denmark  Jensen  and 
Lucina  Johnson.  He  was  baptized 
April  29,  1888,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  23,  1924,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug,  22,  1926, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

LAU,  Hyrum  Moroni,  Bishop  of  the 
Soda  Springs  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1926  to  1927,  was  born  Nov. 
10,  1870,  in  Providence,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Daniel  P.  Lau  and  Dor- 
othy Zollinger.  He  was  baptized  July 
30,  1881,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  Germany,  in  1899- 
1901,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
26,  1902,  by  Louis  S.  Pond,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  23,  1926,  by 
Rudger   Clawson. 

McLEAN,  David  Kay  Mofifat,  Bish- 
op of  the  Soda  Springs  Ward,  Idaho 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1917  to  1926,  was 
born  June  7,  1874,  in  Meadowville, 
Rich  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  McLean 
and  Janet  Moffat,  He  was  baptized 
May  13,  1883,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov,  15,  1914,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun.,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  25, 
1917,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

MUIR,  George  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Gray's  Lake  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1896  to  1915,  was  born  Oct.  10, 
1865,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  S.  Muir  and  Lucy  Darke, 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept,  12,  1897,  by  John  Henry 
Smith. 

REDDISH,  Fredrick  Herbert,  Bish- 
op of  the  Lund  Ward,  Idaho  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1900  to  1915,  was  born 
Dec.  28,  1866,  in  Old  Whittington,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  Henry  Reddish  and 
Eliza  Hurst.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1880,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct,  27,^1895,  by  Abraham  H. 
Cannon,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
21,  1899,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


493 


SANDERS,  Carl  August,  Bishop  of 
the  Kelly  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1924  to  1927,  was  born  Dec.  31, 
1879,  in  Svardsjo,  Sweden,  a  son  of 
Carl  G.  Sanders  and  Martha  Anderson. 
He  was  baptized  May  1,  1920,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
25,  1924,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

SESSIONS,  Keplar,  first  counselor 
in  the  Idaho  Stake  presidency,  Idaho, 
from  1916  to  1930,  was  born  Dec.  3, 
1855,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Perregrine  Sessions  and  Lucina  Call. 
He  was  baptized  in  1863,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1892-1894,  and  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  Nov.  19, 
1916,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

WILSON,  Joseph  Ellis,  jun..  Bishop 
of  the  Lund  Ward,  Idaho  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1922  to  1930,  was  born  June  15, 
1878,  in  Clifton,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Ellis  Wilson  and  Lerona  Abigail  Mon- 
roe Mai'tin.  He  was  baptized  June  15, 
1886,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1897-1899,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  9,  1906,  by  Seymour  B.  Young, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  26,  1922, 
by   George  F.   Richards. 


Idaho  Falls  Stake 

ANDERSON,  Christian,  Bishop  of 
the  Amnion  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1899  to  1913,  was  born 
Dec.  11,  1863,  in  Mantua,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Thomas  C.  Anderson  and  Sidse 
Nielsen.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  21, 
1877,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  25,  1899,  by  John  Henry 
Smith. 

ANDERSON,  Lyle  M.,  Bishop  of 
the  Amnion  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  16,  1897,  in  Mantua,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Joseph  Anderson  and  Mary  C. 
Christensen.     He   was    baptized   July 


5,  1905,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1919-1921,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  9,  1930, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

ANDRUS,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the 
Ucon  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1915  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept. 
12,  1873,  in  Draper,  Utah,  a  son  of  Milo 
Andrus  and  Jane  Munday.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  2,  1883,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1909-1911, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  23, 
1900,  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop 
May  21,  1916,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

BALL,  Leonard  Garfield,  president 
of  the  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  9,  1882, 
in  Wilkes  County,  North  Carolina,  a 
son  of  James  C.  Ball  and  Lucenith 
Marlow.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  4, 
1902,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1909-1910,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  13,  1910,  by  Charles 
W.  Penrose,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  3, 
1913,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

BARLOW,  Truman  C,  Bishop  of  the 
lona  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1913  to  1919,  was  born  Oct.  29, 
1879,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of  T. 
H.  Barlow  and  Fanny  Call.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  2,  1913,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

BAUER,  Eberhard,  Bishop  of  the 
Coltman  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1906  to  1913,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  18,  1906, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

BODILY,  Henry  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
lona  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1928,  was  born  Oct.  22, 
1875,  in  Lewiston,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Edwin  Bodily  and  Matilda  Roberts. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  24,  1885,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  June  6,  1914,  by 
George  F.  Richards.  He  presided  over 
the  Preston  1st  Ward,  Franklin  Stake, 
in  1914-1918,  and  was  set  apart  May 


494 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


25,  1919,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards  to 
preside  over  the  lona  Ward.  Bishop 
Bodily  died  Jan.  1,  1928,  of  blood  poi- 
soning. 

BRUNT,  Joseph  Alfred,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Idaho  Falls  Stake  presi- 
dency from  1925  to  1929,  was  born 
Aug.  28,  1883,  in  Kaysville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Geo.  Brunt  and  Elizabeth  S. 
Burnett.  He  was  baptized  at  eight 
years  of  age,  ordained  an  Elder  April 
6,  1903,  by  Chas.  Rockwood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1903-1905,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  2,  1908,  and  a  Bishop  May 

25,  1924,  by  James  E.  Talmage.  He 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Idaho  Falls  1st 
Ward  from  1824  to  1925,  and  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  Dec.  20,  1925, 
by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

BURTENSHAW,   William    Francis, 

Bishop  of  tha  Shelton  Ward,  Idaho 
Falls  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  2,  1893,  in 
Shelton,  the  son  of  William  Burten- 
shaw  and  Sarah  A.  Clegg.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  2,  1907,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  29,  1929, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

CAINE,  Fred  A.,  Bishop  of  the  Lin- 
coln Wai'd,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1920,  was  born  March  24, 
1884,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Alfred  Henry  Caine  and  Margaret 
Ann  Mitchell.  He  was  baptized  March 
22,  1892,  filled  a  mission  to  Japan  in 
1902-1910,  was  sustained  as  Bishop  of 
the  Lincoln  Ward  May  4,  1919,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  11,  1919, 
by  Charles  W.  Hanson. 

CHAFFIN,  Carlyle,  Bishop  of  the 
Lincoln  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1926  to  1930,  was  born  May 

26,  1894,  in  Cedar  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  John  R.  Chaffin  and  Ellen  J.  Mur- 
rie.  He  was  baptized  May  26,  1902, 
ordained  an  Elder  April  12,  1914,  com- 
menced a  mission  to  Holland  (serving 


five  months),  was  transferred  when 
the  World  war  broke  out  and  finished 
his  mission  term  in  the  Eastern  States 
in  1914-1916.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  26,  1922,  by  Heber  C.  Aus- 
tin, and  a  Bishop  May  16,  1926,  by 
Orson  F,  Whitney. 

COOK,  George  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Milo  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1924  to  1930,  was  born  Nov,  10, 
1877,  in  South  Weber,  Utah,  a  son  of 
David  S.  Cook  and  Janette  Hunter.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1886,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  England  in  1914-1916,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  24,  1917, 
by  James  E.  Talmage,  who  also  or- 
dained him  a  Bishop  May  24,  1924. 

CRABTREE,  Charles  Samuel,  Bish- 
op of  the  Idaho  Falls  Ward  in  1907- 
1919  and  Bishop  of  the  Idaho  Falls  1st 
Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
March  to  August,  1919,  was  born  July 
7,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Charles  Crabtree  and  Elizabeth 
Aston.  He  was  baptized  in  1865,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  5,  1907,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

DAVIS,  Parley,  Bishop  of  the  Milo 
Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1900  to  1917,  was  born  May  27,  1857, 
in  Tredegar,  Monmouthshire,  Wales, 
a  son  of  John  E.  Davis  and  Margaret 
Edwards.  He  was  baptized  in  1865, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1869,  moved  to 
Idaho  in  1884,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  28,  1892,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  23,  1900,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

GODFREY,  James  Clifton,  Bishop  of 
the  Ucon  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1913  to  1914,  was  born 
Aug.  23,  1873,  in  Murray,  Utah,  a  son 
of  James  Godfrey  and  Sophia  Clifton. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  21,  1881,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1909- 
1911,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  May  4,  1913,  by  Hyrum  M, 
Smith.  He  died  Dec.  14,  1914,  in  Ucon, 
Idaho. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


496 


JOHNSON,  Gustaf  Henry,  Bishop 
of  the  Idaho  Falls  1st  Ward,  Idaho 
Falls  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1927  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  June  2,  1886,  in  Hyde 
Park,  Utah,  a  son  of  Gustaf  Johnson 
and  Anna  Sofia  Christensen.  He  was 
baptized  July  4,  1894,  ordained  an 
Elder  in  May,  1905,  by  Chas.  E.  Din- 
woodey,  and  filled  a  mission  to  Sweden 
in  1905-1908.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  8,  1928,  by  Fred  A.  Caine, 
and  a  Bishop  Feb.  11,  1928,  by  Rud- 
ger  Clawson. 

KIRKHAM,  Hyrum  R.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Idaho 
Falls  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1925  to  1926, 
was  born  July  15,  1882,  at  Lehi,  Utah, 
the  son  of  George  Kirkham  and  Mary 
Russon.  He  was  baptized  July  20, 
1890,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  4, 
1913,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  22,  1915,  by  Pres.  Jos.  F. 
Smith.  He  served  as  Bishop  of  the 
Ucon  Ward  in  1915-1916. 

LAIRD,  James,  Bishop  of  the  Idaho 
Falls  4th  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930,  was  born 
May  14,  1877,  in  Mountain  Dell,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Edward  Laird  and  Valeria 
Flint.  He  was  baptized  June  4,  1885, 
ordained  a  Seventy  April  8,  1898,  by 
Geo.  Teasdale  and  filled  two  missions 
to  Great  Britain  in  1898-1900  and  1915- 
1918.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  14,  1926,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and 
a  Bishop  Feb.  11,  1928,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

MULLINER,  Joseph  S.,  sen..  Bish- 
op of  the  lona  Ward,  Idaho  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1890  to  1895,  was 
born  Dec.  10,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Samuel  Mulliner  and 
Mary  Richardson.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  19, 
1890,  by  John  W.  Taylor,  and  died  in 
1923. 

NIELSEN,  Jesse  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Idaho  Falls  2nd  Ward,  Idaho  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  May  10,  1885,  in  Mantua,  Utah,  a 


son  of  Lars  P.  Nielsen  and  Sarah 
Hansen.  He  was  baptized  May  10, 
1893,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Feb.  12,  1928,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

SCHWIEDER,   Arthur   William, 

Bishop  of  the  lona  Ward,  Idaho  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Aug.  21,  1887,  in  Lewiston,  Min- 
nesota, a  son  of  Gotlieb  Schwieder  and 
Henrietta  Rubin.  He  was  baptized 
May  21,  1907,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  28,  1921,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  22, 
1928,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

STANGER,  Albert  Edward,  Bishop 
of  the  Lincoln  Ward,  Idaho  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1912  to  1919,  was 
born  March  13,  1872,  in  Slaterville, 
Utah,  the  son  of  George  Stanger  and 
Mary  Etherington.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  March  14,  1905,  and  a 
Bishop  Dec.  15,  1912. 

STANGER,  Alfred  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
lona  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1896  to  1901,  was  born  April  4, 
1859,  in  Payson,  Utah,  a  son  of  George 
Stanger  and  Mary  Etherington.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  26, 
1890,  by  Jos.  S.  Mulliner,  and  a  Bish- 
op Dec.  14, 1896,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

STUCKI,  Gottfried,  Bishop  of  the 
Coltman  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  26,  1890,  in  Bern,  Switzerland, 
a  son  of  Gottlieb  Stucki  and  Anna 
Gamfeler.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  20, 
1900,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1901,  was 
ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  10,  1913,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Western  States 
in  1914-1917.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  29,  1921,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  15,  1926,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

TELFORD,  John  Witt,  Bishop  of 
the  Lincoln  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1922  to  1926,  was  born 
April  7,  1872,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a 
son    of    Robert    Telford    and    Maria 


496 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Spooner.  He  was  baptized  July  31, 
1881,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1906-1909,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  9,  1919,  by  Thomas 
W.  Lee,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  26,  1922, 
by  John  A,  Widtsoe. 

WARD,  George  Plant,  Bishop  of  the 
lona  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1895  to  1896,  was  born  Aug.  20, 
1854,  in  Walton,  Northamtonshire, 
England,  a  son  of  George  P.  Ward  and 
Sarah  Plant.  He  was  baptized  in  June, 
1868,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  June  9, 
1895,  by  John  Henry  Smith.  He  died 
Aug.  17,  1900, 

WEBB,  Eli  J.,  Bishop  of  the  Lincoln 
Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1920  to  1922,  was  born  March  17,  1879, 
in  Lehi,  Utah.  He  was  baptized  July 
21,  1888,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
11,  1918,  by  James  E.  Steele,  and  a 
Bishop  Aug.  28,  1920,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

WILLIAMS,  Alma,  Bishop  of  the 
Osgood  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  5,  1881,  in  Mayfield,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Samuel  Moroni  Williams  and  Esther 
Susan  Milo.    He  was  baptized  June  8, 

1889,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1907-1909,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  14,  1926,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards,  and  a  Bishop  May  15,  1927, 
by  David  O.  McKay. 

WOOLF,  John  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Ucon  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1909  to  1913,  was  born  Nov.  22, 
1861,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  Woolf  and  Malinda  J.  Bradley. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1871,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  9,  1909, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

WOOTTON,  Vincent  F.,  Bishop  of 
the  Coltman  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1921  to  1926,  was  born 
Nov.  21,  1881,  at  Butler,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Charles  R.  Wootton  and  Esther  R. 
Ballard.     He  was   baptized   April  30, 

1890,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 


and   Bishop  May  29,  1921,  by  James 
E.  Talmage. 

WRIGHT,  Moses  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Lincoln  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1908  to  1912,  was  born  Jan. 
27,  1867,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah.  He 
was  baptized  in  1875,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  14,  1905,  by  James  E. 
Steele,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  8,  1908,  by 
George  Albert  Smith. 


Juab  Stake 


AAGAARD,    Niels    Jensen,    Bishop 

of  the  Levan  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1877  to  1892,  was  born  Jan.  15, 
1835,  in  Jutland,  Denmark,  a  son  of 
Jens  Aagaard  and  Maren  Jensen.  He 
became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  and 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1859,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  United  States  in  1876-1877, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set 
apart  to  preside  in  Levan  July  1,  1877, 
by  John  W.  Young. 

BRYAN,  Charles  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Nephi  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1861  to  1868,  was  born  Dec.  14,  1807, 
in  Jefferson  Co.,  Kentucky,  a  son  of 
John  Bryan  and  Elizabeth  Hinkle.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
May  17,  1861,  by  John  Taylor. 

COWAN,  Peter  Burt,  Bishop  of  the 
Nephi  South  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept. 
19,  1882,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  S.  Cowan  and  Elizabeth 
Ann  Condie.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission 
to  Hawaii  in  1902-1906,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Feb.  8,  1914,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  who  also  ordained  him  a 
Bishop  Oct.  4,  1924. 

ELLERTSON,  Ephraim,  Bishop  of 
the  Mona  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1904  to  1910,  was  born  Jan.  20, 
1860,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Ellertson  and  Christine 
G.  Lund.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  New  Zea- 
land in  1893-1894   (released  early  on 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


497 


account  of  illness)   and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Oct.  30,  1904,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

ELLERTSON,  John  Louis,  Bishop 
of  the  Mona  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1901  to  1902,  was  born  Nov.  13, 
1857,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Ellertson  and  Christine 
G,  Lund.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  in  the  Northern  States 
in  1896-1898,  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
Jan.  21,  1901,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

GRACE,  Isaac  Henry,  first  counse- 
lor in  the  Juab  Stake  presidency,  Utah, 
from  1904  to  1914,  was  born  Aug.  9, 
1857,  in  Nephi,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Isaac  Grace  and  Elizabeth  Williams. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  Hans  Petersen, 
later  was  ordained  a  High  Priest.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich  Islands 
in  1891-1894,  and  for  sevei'al  years  ser- 
ved as  a  member  of  the  Juab  Stake 
High  Council.  From  1897  to  1904  he 
acted  as  second  counselor  in  the  Juab 
Stake  presidency,  and  as  first  counselor 
from  May  1,  1904,  to  August  9,  1914. 
During  both  these  periods  James  W. 
Paxman  was  pi'esident  of  the  stake. 
Later  (1919-1921)  Elder  Grace  served 
again  as  second  counselor  under  Presi- 
dent Thomas  D.  Rees.  (See  Vol.  3,  Bio. 
Ency.,  p.  384.) 

HAWS,  John  Maddison,  Bishop  of 
the  Mona  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1877  to  1886,  was  born  March 
24,  1847,  in  Greene  Township,  Wayne 
Co.,  Illinois,  a  son  of  Gilbert  Haws 
and  Hannah  Whitcomb.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1856,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  1,  1877,  by  Erastus 
Snow,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1899-1900. 

KIENKE,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Mona 
Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah,  from  1886  to 
1892,  was  born  April  6,  1831,  in  Meck- 
lenburg-Schwerin,  Germany,  a  son  of 
Christopher  Kienke  and  Margaret 
Buhse.      He   was    baptized    Sept.    12, 


1852,  filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in 
1878-1880,  and  was  chosen  as  Bishop 
of  the  Mona  Ward  in  1886. 

LUNT,  John  E.,  first  counselor  in 
the  Juab  Stake  presidency,  Utah,  from 
1914  to  1924,  was  born  May  3,  1880,  in 
Nephi,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Al- 
fred Lunt  and  Pricilla  Pitt.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  6,  1888,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1900-1902,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  6,  1906,  by 
Stirling  Williams,  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  Aug.  9,  1914,  by  Joseph 
F.   Smith,  jun. 

NEWTON,  James  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Mona  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1892  to  1897,  was  born  Sept.  1, 
1863,  in  Mona,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  Newton  and  Martha  Kay. 
He  was  baptized  in  1871,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1888-1890,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Jan.  17,  1892,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

PARKES,    Thomas    Henry    George, 

second  counselor  in  the  Juab  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1919, 
was  born  May  27,  1861,  in  Derby, 
Derbyshire,  England,  a  son  of  Thomas 
Parkes  and  Mary  Hannah  Peake.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1863,  was 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northwestern  States 
(now  Northern  States)  Mission  in 
1887-1888.  Brother  Parkes  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  Aug.  12, 
1917,   by   Rudger   Clawson. 

PAXMAN,  Albert  Reynolds,  second 
counselor  in  the  Juab  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1914  to  1917,  was  born 
Aug.  9,  1875,  at  American  Fork,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Paxman  and  Ann 
Rushin  Keys.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
5,  1883,  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  Aug.  9, 
1914,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

PAXMAN,  Samuel  George,  first 
counselor  in  the  Juab  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  in  1930 -f-,  was  born  Feb. 


Vol.  IV,  No.  32 


Aug.  8.  1936 


498 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


21,  1896,  at  Nephi,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  James  W.  Paxman  and  Julia 
Sudberry.  He  was  baptized  July  2, 
1904,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  Canada  in  1919-1922,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  17,  1924, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  Sept.  14,  1930,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

PETERSON,  Erastus  P.,  Bishop  of 
the  Levan-Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  May 
17,  1889,  at  Levan,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Erick  Peterson  and  Anna  Soren- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1897, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  Denmark,  in  1913-1915,  was 
sustained  as  Bishop  March  18,  1923, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op in  Salt  Lake  City  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

PETTIGREW,     William     Helaman, 

Bishop  of  the  Nephi  First  Ward,  Juab 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1901  to  1912,  was 
born  March  5,  1860,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  David  Pettigi-ew  and 
Caroline  Cope.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1890-1892,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Nov.  22,  1901,  by  George 
Teasdale. 

PEXTON,  Jude  Nathaniel  Chaplin, 

second  counselor  in  the  Juab  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1924, 
was  born  Dec.  5,  1882,  in  Nephi,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  Pexton  and 
Mary  Chaplin.  He  was  baptized  June 
3,  1891,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  Feb. 
13,  1921,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

NIELSEN,  Christian  Emil.  Bishop 
of  the  Mona  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1897  to  1901,  was  born  Aug.  16, 
1839,  in  Middelfart,  Odense  amt,  Den- 
mark, a  son  of  Rasmus  Nielsen.  He 
was  baptized  July  6,  1852,  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1854,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Dec.  22,  1897,  by  George  Teas- 
dale, 


RASMUSSEN,  Niels  Peter,  Bishop 
of  the  Levan  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1892  to  1901,  was  born  Oct.  27, 
1843,  near  Nykjobing,  on  the  island 
of  Falster,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Peter 
Rasmussen  and  Bodil  Olsen.  He  was 
baptized  July  3,  1861,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1862,  was  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Den- 
mark in  1878-1880,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  July  20,  1890,  by  George 
Q.  Cannon  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
17,  1892,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund.  He  died 
Aug.  9,  1922. 

REES,  Thomas  David,  jun.,  presi- 
dent of  the  Juab  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1914  to  1924,  was  born  Sept.  11,  1877, 
in  Wales,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Thomas  David  and  Elizabeth  Rees. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  1,  1885,  ordain- 
ed to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission 
to  Switzerland  and  Germany  in  1904- 
1906,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
12,  1908,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  was 
set  apart  as  president  Aug.  9,  1914,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

SMITH,  Albert  Edward,  Bishop  of 
the  Nephi  North  Ward,  Juab  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  24,  1886,  at  Manassa,  Conejos  Co., 
Colorado,  a  son  of  Albert  R.  Smith 
and  Irene  U.  Haskell.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  6,  1895,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1910-1912,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  15,  1914,  by 
George  Albert  Smith,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Dec.  4,  1927,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

SPERRY,  Charles,  first  counselor  in 
the  Juab  Stake  pi-esidency,  Utah,  from 
1900  to  1904,  was  born  June  30,  1829, 
in  Mecca,  Trumble  Co.,  Ohio,  a  son  of 
Joy  Sperry  and  Mary  Lamont.  He 
was  baptized  in  1847,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  25,  1872,  by  Joel  Grover, 
and  served  as  Bishop  of  the  Nephi 
2nd  or  North  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1877  to  1883.  He  died  May  31, 
1914. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


499 


OCKEY,  James  Heber,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Juab  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept.  7, 
1889,  in  Nephi,  Utah,  a  son  of  Heber 
Brewer  Ockey  and  Esther  Burton.  He 
was  baptized  June  4,  1898,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
South  Africa  in  1912-1915,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  4,  1927,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman,  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  Sept.  14,  1930. 

TAYLOR,  James  Elmer,  Bishop  of 
the  Levan  Ward,  Juab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1901  to  1923,  was  born  Feb.  20, 
1864,  in  Springville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Elmer  Taylor  and  Wealthy  Ann  Spaf- 
ford.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1877, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1899-1901, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  12,  1902,  by  George  Teas- 
dale. 


Juarez  Stake 


ABEGG,  Moroni  Lehi,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Juarez  Stake  presidency, 
Mexico,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  14,  1891,  in  Payson,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Arnold  Abegg  and  Louisa  Mott 
Haag.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  1916,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  was 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  in  the 
Juarez  Stake  presidency  Sept.  8,  1929, 
by  Melvin  J,  Ballard. 

BENTLEY,  Joseph  Charles,  presi- 
dent of  the  Juarez  Stake  of  Zion, 
Mexico,  from  1916  to  1929,  was  born 
Aug.  31,  1859,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Richard  Bentley  and  Eliza- 
beth Price.  He  was  baptized  in  1867, 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  25,  1877,  filled 
a  mission  to  England  in  1879-1881,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1882,  and 
went  to  Mexico  in  1892.  He  acted  as 
Bishop  of  the  Juarez  Ward  from  1898 
to  1916  and  was  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Juarez  Stake  May  14,  1916, 
by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

BOWMAN,  Claudius,  first  counse- 
lor  in   the   Juarez    Stake   presidency, 


Mexico,  from  1929  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
Sept.  6,  1890,  in  Kanab,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Henry  Eyring  Bowman  and  Mary 
Gubler.  He  was  baptized  June  2,  1900, 
moved  to  Mexico  in  1900,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Oct.  30,  1924,  by  John 
T.  Whetten  and  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  in  the  Juarez  Stake  presi- 
dency Sept.  8,  1929,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

CALL,  Anson  Bowen,  Bishop  of  the 
Dublan  Ward,  Juarez  Stake,  Mexico, 
from  1915  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  20, 
1863,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Anson  Call  and  Ann  Mariah  Bowen. 
He  was  baptized  in  October,  1872, 
moved  to  Mexico  in  1890,  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Feb.  25,  1893,  by 
B.  H.  Roberts,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1895-1897.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  11,  1915,  by 
Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

FARNSWORTH,  Lester  Burt,  Bish- 
op of  the  Garcia  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1917  to  1928,  was  born 
Aug.  23,  1879,  in  Tuba  City,'  Arizona, 
a  son  of  Alonzo  Farnsworth  and  Mary 
Ann  Staker.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
23,  1887,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Nov.  13,  1917,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

FARR,  Winslow,  Bishop  of  the  Du- 
blan Ward,  Juarez  Stake,  Mexico,  from 
1889  to  1899,  was  born  May  11,  1837, 
in  Charleston,  Vermont,  a  son  of  Wins- 
low  Farr  and  Olive  Hovey  Freeman. 
He  was  baptized  in  1845  in  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  came  to  Utah  in  1847,  filled  a 
mission  to  England  in  1868-1870,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  April  19,  1871, 
by  Wilford  Woodruff,  and  a  Bishop 
May  28,  1877,  by  John  Taylor,  and  pre- 
sided over  the  Ogden  3rd  Ward,  Utah. 
He  died  Jan.  5,  1914. 

HAWS,  George  Martin,  Bishop  of 
the  Chuichupa  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1899  to  1904,  was  born 
Dec.  15,  1858,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Wm.  Wallace  Haws  and  Barbara 
Belinda  Mills.  He  was  baptized  May 
10,  1868,  called  to  Arizona  in  1877,  or- 


500 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


dained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  2,  1884,  by 
Brigham  Young,  jun.,  and  a  Bishop 
Nov.  10,  1900,  by  Abraham  O.  Wood- 
ruff. 

JOHNSON,  Sixtus  Ellis,  Bishop  of 
the  Chuichupa  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1894  to  1895,  was  born 
Oct.  8,  1829,  in  Pomfret,  New  York,  a 
son  of  Joel  H.  Johnson  and  Anna 
Picksley.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  came  to  Johnson,  Utah,  in 
1848,  and  was  called  to  settle  Virgin 
City.  Bro.  Johnson,  as  a  High  Priest 
took  charge  of  affairs  from  April, 
1894,  to  June,  1895,  and  was  later  or- 
dained a  Bishop. 

JOHNSON,    William    Derby,    jun.. 

Bishop  of  the  Diaz  Ward,  Juarez 
Stake,  Mexico,  from  1887  to  1911,  was 
born  May  2,  1850,  in  Council  Bluffs, 
Iowa,  a  son  of  Wm.  D.  Johnson,  sen., 
and  Jane  C.  Brown.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1858,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  April  17, 1877,  by  Erastus  Snow, 
and  a  Bishop  Nov.  9,  1886,  by  Geo. 
Teasdale.  He  acted  as  Bishop  of 
Kanab  Ward  in  1877-1884  and  as  a 
counselor  in  the  Kanab  Stake  presi- 
dency in  1884-1887.  He  died  June  2, 
1910. 

JUDD,  Jerome  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Chuichupa  Ward,  Juarez  Stake,  Mex- 
ico, from  1926  to  1930,  was  a  son  of 
Hyrum  Jerome  Judd  and  Susan  Boyce 
Judd.  He  was  baptized  in  1877,  moved 
to  Mexico  in  1885,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  6,  1926,  by  John  Thomas 
Whetten,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  14,  1926, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

KEELER,  Ralph  Budd,  president 
of  the  Juarez  Stake  of  Zion,  Mexico, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec. 
27,  1897,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Joseph  B.  Keeler  and  Martha  Alice 
Fairbanks.  He  was  baptized  in  1906, 
ordained  to  the  Pi-iesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1919- 
1921,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
14,  1926,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman,  and 
was    set   apart   as    president   of   the 


Juarez   Stake   Sept.  8,   1929,  by  Mel- 
vin J.  Ballard. 

LUNT,  Clarence  L.,  Bishop  of  the 
Pacheco  Ward,  Juarez  Stake,  Mexico, 
from  1920  to  1930,  was  born  July  16, 
1896,  in  Colonia  Pacheco,  a  son  of 
Henry  Lunt  and  Sarah  Ann  Lunt 
(Lunt  was  her  maiden  name).  He  was 
baptized  July  16,  1904,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Oct.  14,  1921,  by 
George  Albert  Smith. 

McCLELLAN,  Charles  E.,  second 
counselor  in  the  Juarez  Stake  presi- 
dency, Mexico,  from  1908  to  1912,  was 
born  Feb.  8,  1875,  in  Payson,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  C.  McClellan  and  Al- 
meda  Day.  He  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency 
March  8,  1908. 

PRATT,  Helaman,  first  counselor  in 
the  Juarez  Stake  presidency,  Mexico, 
from  1902  to  1908,  had  charge  of  the 
Mexican  Mission  from  1883  to  1887;  on 
Dec.  9,  1895,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  on 
Feb.  10,  1902,  was  promoted  from  sec- 
ond to  first  counselor  in  the  Juarez 
Stake  presidency.    He  died  in  1909. 

ROBINSON,  Samuel  John,  Bishop 
of  the  Dublan  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1899  to  1907,  was  born 
Dec.  10,  1863,  in  Payson,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Jos.  Robinson  and  Jemima 
Parks.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Jan.  3,  1900,  and  called  on 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1928. 

ROMNEY,  Junius,  president  of  the 
Juarez  Stake  of  Zion,  Mexico,  from 
1908  to  1912,  was  born  March  12,  1878, 
in  St.  George,  Utah,  a  son  of  Miles  P. 
Romney  and  Catherine  J.  Cottam.  He 
was  chosen  as  president  of  the  Juarez 
Stake  March  8,  1908. 

SCOTT,  Franklin,  Bishop  of  the 
Oaxaca  Ward,  Juarez  Stake,  Mexico, 
from  1894  to  1899,  was  born  Dec.  1, 
1851,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Andrew  H.  Scott  and  Sarah  A.  Roe. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1877 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


501 


by  Peter  Madsen,  and  a  Bishop  March 
11,  1894,  by  Brigham  Young,  jun.  He 
was  killed  Aug.  7,  1901. 

SEVEY,  George  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
the  Chuichupa  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1911  to  1912,  and  from 
1919  to  1923,  was  born  Aug.  7,  1881, 
in  Pine  Valley,  Utah,  the  son  of  Geo. 
W.  Sevey  and  Martha  N.  Thomas.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  9,  1890,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Sept.  1,  1911. 

STEINER,  John  Ernest,  Bishop  of 
the  Pacheco  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1903  to  1912,  was  born 
May  30,  1869,  in  La  Chaix-de-Fonds, 
Switzerland,  a  son  of  John  Martin 
Steiner  and  Ann  Barbara  Smith.  He 
came  to  Utah  when  he  was  three  years 
old,  his  parents  remaining  behind.  He 
was  raised  by  John  C.  Naegle,  filled 
a  mission  to  Switzerland  in  1897-1899, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 
18,  1901,  by  Helaman  Pratt,  and  a 
Bishop  Nov.  6,  1903,  by  John  W. 
Taylor. 

THURBER,  Albert  Daniel,  Bishop 
of  the  Dublan  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1907  to  1912,  was  born 
May  13,  1854,  in  Palmyra,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Albert  K.  Thurber  and  Thurza  M. 
Berry.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1880-1881,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  10,  1907.  He 
died  Jan.  22,  1931. 

TURLEY,  Isaac,  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Juarez  Branch,  Juarez  Stake,  Mex- 
ico, in  1885,  was  born  Nov.  22,  1837, 
in  Churchville,  Upper  Canada,  near 
Toronto,  the  son  of  Theodore  Turley 
and  Frances  Kimberley.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1844  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Sept.  23,  1880, 
by  William  Fawcett,  called  to  Arizona 
in  1876,  and  appointed  to  preside  over 
the  Juarez  Branch  Dec.  4,  1885. 

WALSER,  John  Jacob,  Bishop  of 
the  Juarez  Ward,  Juarez  Stake,  Mex- 
ico, from  1916  to  1922,  was  boi'n  April 
20,  1849,  in  Herisau,  Appenzell,  Switz- 


erland, the  son  of  John  J.  and  Anne 
Walser.  He  was  baptized  April  20, 
1859,  filled  two  foreign  missions  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  19,  1916, 
by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

WHETTEN,  Clifford  Leon,  Bishop 
of  the  Chuichupa  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1923  to  1926,  was  born 
May  15,  1898,  in  Colonia  Garcia,  Mex- 
ico, the  son  of  John  Thomas  Whetten 
and  Agnes  Belzora  Savage.  He  was 
baptized  June  3,  1906,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  21,  1923,  by  Joseph  C. 
Bentley,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  26,  1923, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

WHETTEN,  James  Elbert,  Bishop 
of  the  Garcia  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1928  to  1930,  was  born 
July  18,  1881,  in  Snowflake,  Arizona, 
the  son  of  James  Thomas  Whetten  and 
Agnes  B.  Savage.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  5,  1889,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  24,  1917,  by  Joseph  C.  Bentley, 
and  a  Bishop  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

WHETTEN,  John  Thomas,  Bishop 
of  the  Garcia  Ward,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  from  1898  to  1912,  was  born 
March  7,  1862,  at  Cross  Plains,  Done 
Co.,  Wisconsin,  the  son  of  John  Whet- 
ten and  Sophia  Atkins.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  December,  1872,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  March  9,  1898,  by  John 
A.  Taylor. 

WHITING,  Charles,  sen.,  presiding 
Elder  at  Colonia  Diaz,  Juarez  Stake, 
Mexico,  in  1886,  was  born  Dec.  16, 
1853,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the  son  of  Ed- 
win Whiting  and  Mary  E.  Cox.  He 
moved  to  Mexico  in  1885,  and  died  Dec. 
22,  1917. 

WILSON,  Marion  Lyman,  Bishop  of 
the  Pacheco  Ward,  Juarez  Stake,  Mex- 
ico, in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  26,  1898, 
in  Logan,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  E. 
Wilson  and  Lerona  S.  Monroe.  He  was 
baptized  in  1906,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  2,  1930, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

YOUNG,  Walter  Ernest,  Bishop  of 
the  Juarez  Wai-d,  Juarez  Stake,  Mexi- 


502 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


CO,  from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  22,  1887,  in  Manassa,  Colorado, 
the  son  of  James  A.  Young  and  Lillian 
A.  Hurst.  He  was  baptized  in  1896, 
filled  a  mission  to  Mexico  in  1910- 
1913,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
11,  1915,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  15,  1922,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant, 


Kanab  Stake 


ANDERSON,     Charles     Carpenter, 

Bishop  of  the  Glendale  Ward,  Kanab 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930,  was 
born  Feb.  15,  1892,  in  Glendale,  a  son 
of  Swain  M.  Anderson  and  Elizabeth 
E.  Carpenter.  He  was  baptized  March 
31,  1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  23,  1926,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

CARROLL,  Edward,  Bishop  of  the 
Orderville  Ward,  Kanab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan. 
23,  1875,  at  Heber  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Chas.  N.  Carroll  and  Kezia  Giles. 
He  was  baptized  May  3,  1883,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  2,  1900, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop 
Dec.  10,  1920,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

CHAMBERLAIN,  Israel  Hoyt,  Bish- 
op of  the  Kanab  Ward,  Kanab  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1913  to  1922  and  from 
1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  31, 
1884,  in  Orderville,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  Chamberlain  and  Ellen  A. 
Hoyt.  He  was  baptized  in  September, 
1893,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  7,  1913,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son, 

CUTLER,  Harmon  Scott,  Bishop  of 
the  Kanab  Ward,  Kanab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1901  to  1905,  was  born  Sept.  11, 
1862,  in  American  Fork,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Royal  J.  Cutler.  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Dec.  15,  1901,  by  Abraham  0. 
Woodruff. 

CUTLER,  Royal  James,  sen,,  Bish- 
op of  Glendale  Ward,  Kanab  Stake, 
Utah,  from   1879   to   1894,  was   born 


Feb.  1,  1828,  in  Amboy,  Oswego  Co., 
N.  Y.,  the  son  of  Harmon  Cutler  and 
Susannah  Barton.  He  was  baptized  in 
1842  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  States  in  1851-1852,  came 
to  the  "Valley"  in  1852,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  4,  1877,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  March  8,  1879,  by 
Erastus  Snow.  He  died  Aug.  3,  1894. 

CUTLER,  Royal  James,  jun.,  Bish- 
op of  the  Glendale  Ward,  Kanab  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1900  to  1908,  was  born 
Oct.  26,  1861,  near  American  Fork, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Royal  J.  Cutler  and 
Theda  Ann  Morton.  He  was  baptized 
in  September,  1877,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty June  11,  1885,  by  Edward  Stev- 
enson, and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1891-1892.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  28,  1900,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  died  Sept.  20, 
1934. 

HARRIS,  Mo.ses  Davis,  Bishop  of 
the  Glendale  Ward,  Kanab  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1894  to  1900,  was  born 
April  7,  1864,  in  Harrisburg,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Silas  Harris  and  Sarah  Al- 
dredge.  He  was  baptized  in  1872,  was 
ordained  an  Elder,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northwestern  States  in  1887-1889, 
and  was  set  apai't  as  Bishop  of  the 
Glendale  Ward  Sept.  2,  1894. 

JOHNSON,  Joel  Hills,  Bishop  of  the 
Kanab  Ward,  Kanab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1890  to  1901,  and  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Kanab  Stake  presidency 
from  1901  to  1910,  was  born  Nov.  16, 
1860,  in  Virgin  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Nephi  Johnson  and  Mandana  Mer- 
rill. He  was  baptized  when  nine  years 
old,  moved  to  Kanab  in  1876,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  21,  1890,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  died  at  Salt 
Lake    City    Oct.    22,    1924. 

JOLLEY,    Henry    Bryan    Manning, 

Bishop  of  the  Mt.  Carmel  Ward,  Ka- 
nab Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1902, 
was  born  Oct.  11,  1813,  in  Pitt  County, 
North  Carolina,  the  son  of  Henry  Jol- 
ley   and   Frances   Manning.     He   v/as 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


503 


baptized  March  12,  1842,  in  Tennes- 
see, came  to  Utah  in  1852,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1880- 
1881,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  5,  1877,  by  Erastus 
Snow. 

JUDD,  Asa  Walter,  Bishop  of  the 
Fredonia  Ward,  Kanab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1901  to  1914,  was  born  Aug.  28, 
1868,  at  Eagleville,  Iron  Co.,  Utah, 
(now  Lincoln  Co.,  Nevada),  a  son  of 
Zadok  Knapp  Judd  and  Mary  Minerva 
Dart.  He  was  baptized  May  28,  1877, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Netherlands  in 
1887-1889,  and  another  in  1893-1896, 
acting  as  president  of  that  Mission  in 
1895-1896.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Dec.  15,  1901,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 
In  1933  Elder  Judd  filled  a  short  term 
mission  to  the  Central  States. 

JUDD,  Daniel  Knapp,  Bishop  of  the 
Fredonia  Ward,  Kanab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1929,  was  born  Nov.  2, 
1884,  in  Kanab,  the  son  of  Zadok 
Knapp  Judd  and  Ada  Howell.  He  was 
baptized  in  1893,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  4,  1920, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

JUDD,  William  Maurice,  Bishop  of 
the  Fredonia  Ward,  Kanab  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1914  to  1920,  was  born 
April  14,  1886,  in  Kanab,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Zadok  K.  Judd  and  Ada  Howell. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1894,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Aug.  30,  1914,  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

LAMB,  Osmer,  Bishop  of  the  Mount 
Carmel  Ward,  Kanab  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930 -|-,  was  born  Nov. 
7,  1882,  in  Orderville,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Edward  Lamb  and  Rosanna  Stol- 
worthy.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Central  States  in  1906-1907.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  1, 
1910,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  a  Bish- 
op May  16,  1925,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 


McAllister,      Richard      Samuel, 

Bishop  of  the  Kanab  Ward,  Kanab 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1928,  was 
born  Oct.  17,  1874,  in  St.  George,  Utah, 
the  son  of  William  J.  F.  McAllister 
and  Elnor  J.  Adams.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1900- 
1902,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
17,   1922,  by   Stephen   L.   Richards. 

PUGH,  Charles  Robert,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Kanab  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 -h,  was  born 
May  28,  1874,  in  Kanab,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Edward  Pugh  and  Elizabeth  Kelly. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Chris- 
tian D.  Fjeldsted  July  13,  1898,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  England  in  1898- 
1900.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  24,  1925,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  was  set  apart  as  second  counse- 
lor in  the  Kanab  Stake  presidency. 

ROUNDY,  Quimby,  Bishop  of  the 
Alton  Ward,  Kanab  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1928  to  1930 +,  was  born  Jan.  8,  1888, 
in  Upper  Kanab,  Utah,  a  son  of 
William  Heber  Roundy  and  Malinda 
Parker.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  21, 
1899,  ordained  an  Elder  Aug.  13,  1911, 
by  Jonathan  B.  Heaton,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States  in  1913- 
1915,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  25,  1928,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

SEEGMILLER,  William  West,  pres- 
ident of  the  Kanab  Stake  of  Zion, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1925,  was  born  Oct. 
16,  1876,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Daniel  Seegmiller  and  Ellen  Smith. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
ordained  an  Elder  Aug.  29,  1899,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Germany  in  1899-1902.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  13,  1905,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  and  presided  over 
the  Kanab  Ward  from  1905  to  1910. 
He  was  set  apart  Dec.  5,  1910,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards  as  president  of  the  Ka- 
nab Stake. 

SPENCER,  Howard  0.,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Kanab  Stake  presidency, 


504 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  from  1877  to  1884,  was  born 
June  16,  1838,  in  Gi-eat  Barrington, 
Mass.,  the  son  of  Orson  Spencer  and 
Catherine  Curtis.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  Europe  in  1869-1870,  and  was  chosen 
as  first  counselor  in  the  Kanab  Stake 
presidency  April  18,  1877,  being  set 
apart  by  Orson  Pratt, 


Kolob  Stake 


ANDERSON,  George  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Springville  2nd  Ward,  Kolob 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1900  to  1903,  was 
born  Oct.  28,  1860,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  George  Anderson  and 
Mary  Ann  Thorne.  He  was  baptized 
Jan.  6,  1869,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1906-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Feb.  18,  1900,  by  George  Teasdale. 

BRINGHURST,  John  Frank,  first 
counselor  in  the  Kolob  Stake  presiden- 
cy, Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Dec.  13,  1861,  in  Springville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  Bringhurst 
and  Ann  Dilworth.  He  was  baptized 
in  November,  1872,  ordained  and  set 
apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Springville 
2nd  Ward  July  24,  1904,  by  Reed 
Smoot;  was  set  apart  Nov.  23,  1924, 
as  first  counselor  in  the  Stake  presi- 
dency. He  filled  a  mission  to  Califor- 
nia in  1925-1926. 

BRINGHURST,  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Springville  Ward,  Kolob  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1870  to  1883,  was  born 
Nov.  8,  1818,  in  Passyunk,  Philadel- 
phia Co.,  Pennsylvania,  a  son  of  Jo- 
seph Bringhurst  and  Elizabeth  Evans. 
He  was  baptized  in  January,  1845,  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood  and  filled  a 
special  mission  to  Las  Vegas.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  27,  1870. 

HUNTINGTON,  Oliver  Baker,  jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Springville  1st  Ward, 
Kolob  Stake,  Utah,  from  1903  to  1924, 
was  born  May  30,  1856,  at  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Oliver  Boardman 
Huntington  and  Hannah  Mendenhall 
Sanders.    He   was   baptized   Nov.   12, 


1865.  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  25,  1903,  by  Reed  Smoot. 
He  died  April  6,  1932. 

JOHNSON,  Aaron,  Bishop  of  the 
Springville  Ward,  Kolob  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1851  to  1870,  was  born  June  22, 
1806,  in  Haddam,  Middlesex  Co.,  Con- 
necticut, a  son  of  Didymus  Johnson 
and  Ruhama  Stevens.  He  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  in  Nauvoo  in  1847, 
arrived  in  Utah  in  1850  and  was  one 
of  the  founders  of  Springville,  and  the 
first  Bishop  in  the  new  settlement. 
He  died  May  10,  1877. 

JOHNSON,  Willis  Kelsey,  Bishop  of 
the  Springville  3rd  Ward,  Kolob  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1914  to  1924,  was  born 
June  30,  1875,  in  Springville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Willis  Kelsey  Johnson  and  Sar- 
ah Lowell  Mendenhall.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  3,  1883,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1897-1900,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Pi-iest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  23,  1914,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

LOYND,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the 
Springville  4th  Ward,  Kolob  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1892  to  1910,  was  born 
Dec.  19,  1843,  in  Hyde,  Cheshire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  James  Loynd  and  Eliz- 
abeth Thompson.  He  was  baptized 
May  1,  1851,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  17,  1892,  by 
George  Q.  Cannon. 

MAYCOCK,  George  Ray,  president 
of  the  Kolob  Stake,  Utah,  from  1924 
to  1930,  was  born  Sept.  18,  1879,  in 
Springville,  Utah,  a  son  of  George 
Henry  Maycock  and  Julia  L.  Guymon. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  2,  1888,  ordain- 
ed to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1900-1901, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op of  the  Springville  4th  Ward  Oct. 
10,  1915,  by  James  E.  Talmage,  and 
was  set  apart  as  stake  president  Nov. 
23,  1924. 

PACKARD,  Nephi,  Bishop  of  the 
Springville  Ward,  Kolob  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1883  to  1892,  was  born  July  1, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


505 


1832,  in  Parkman,  Geauga  Co.,  Ohio, 
a  son  of  Noah  Packard  and  Sophia 
Bundy.  He  was  baptized  in  July,  1840, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op March  4,  1883,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith. 
He  died  July  14,  1921. 

ROBERTSON,     Hilton     Alexander, 

Bishop  of  the  Springville  4th  Ward, 
Kolob  Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930, 
was  born  Aug.  2,  1891,  a  son  of  Alex- 
ander Robertson  and  Lucy  Smith.  He 
was  baptized  May  12,  1900,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
Japan  in  1921-1924,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  23, 
1924,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

SNOW,  Edwin  Marion,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Kolob  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1928,  was  born 
Nov.  21,  1859,  in  Manti,  Sanpete  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Warren  S.  Snow  and 
Elizabeth  Whiting.  He  labored  in  the 
Mapleton  Ward  bishopric  for  twenty- 
one  years,  and  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  Nov.  23,  1924.  He  died  Dec. 
11,  1928. 

TUCKETT,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Springville  1st  Ward,  Kolob  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1892  to  1898,  was  born 
April  26,  1834,  in  London,  England,  a 
son  of  Charles  Tuckett  and  Jane  Pat- 
tenden.  He  was  called  on  the  Las  Ve- 
gas mission  in  1856,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  April 
17,  1892,  by  George  Q.  Cannon.  He 
died  Nov.   13,   1931. 

WAINWRIGHT,  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Springville  2nd  Ward,  Kolob 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1929,  was 
born  March  19,  1875,  at  Manchester, 
England,  a  son  of  Henry  Wainwright 
and  Lucy  Hall.  He  was  baptized  April 
11,  1903,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1904, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  23,  1924,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 


from  1882  to  1906,  was  born  Nov.  26, 
1831,  in  Bedford  County,  Tennessee, 
the  son  of  Richard  Bennett  and  Mary 
Bell.  He  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in  1852,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  11,  1877,  by  Abraham  0. 
Smoot  and  ordained  a  Bishop  in  1882 
by  Joseph  F.   Smith. 

COOK,  Henry  Freeman,  Bishop  of 
the  Cedar  Valley  Ward,  Lehi  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1876  to  1882,  was  born 
Jan.  12,  1815,  at  Homer,  New  York, 
baptized  in  1843  and  came  to  Utah 
in  1852.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  30,  1857,  and  died  April 
14,  1882,  in  Cedar  Fort. 

CUTLER,  Thomas  R.,  Bishop  of  the 
Lehi  Ward,  Utah  County,  Utah,  from 
1879  to  1903,  was  born  June  2,  1844, 
in  Sheffield,  England,  a  son  of  Thom- 
as Cutler  and  Elizabeth  Robinson.  He 
arrived  in  Utah  in  1864,  and  became 
a  prominent  and  successful  business 
man  and  ecclesiastical  leader.  He  died 
April  3,  1922,  at  Long  Beach,  Calif. 

HACKING,  Orson  Ezra,  Bishop  of 
the  Cedar  Valley  Ward,  Lehi  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1922,  was  born 
Sept.  16,  1882,  in  Cedar  Valley,  the 
son  of  John  Sampson  Hacking  and 
Jane  Clark.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  14, 
1890,  and  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  8, 
1901,  by  Eli  Bennett. 

PETERSON,  Thomas  Leonard,  Bish- 
op of  the  Lehi  4th  Ward  from  1923 
to  1926,  was  born  March  20,  1881, 
at  Lehi,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  A.  Pe- 
terson  and   Rhoda   Ashton. 


Lehi   Stake 


BENNETT,  Eli,  Bishop  of  the  Ce- 
dar Valley  Ward,   Lehi   Stake,  Utah, 


Lethbridge   Stake 

BROWN,  Joseph  Smith,  jun.,  Bish- 
op of  the  Stavely  (Pine  Coulee)  Ward, 
Lethbridge  Stake,  Canada,  from  1910 
to  1930,  was  born  Jan.  3,  1877,  in  Ox- 
ford, Idaho,  the  son  of  Joseph  S. 
Brown  and  Sarah  Wealthy  Patten.  He 
was  baptized  when  nine  years  old,  or- 
dained an  Elder,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1900-1901,  and  was 


506 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  21,  1910,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

CLARKE,  Peter  Drew,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Lethbridge  Stake  presi- 
dency, Canada,  from  1926  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Jan.  6,  1896,  in  American 
Fork,  Utah,  the  son  of  Peter  G.  Clarke 
and  Margaret  Vilate  Green.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  4,  1904,  ordained  an 
Elder  Jan.  3,  1916,  by  Ira  C.  Fletch- 
er, and  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States  in  1916-1917.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  31,  1926, 
by  Rudger  Clawson  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Lethbridge 
Stake  presidency. 

COLE,  Charles,  Bishop  of  the  Clar- 
esholm  Ward,  Lethbridge  Stake,  Can- 
ada, from  1909  to  1911,  was  born  June 
10,  1858,  at  Covington,  Indiana,  the 
son  of  Samuel  Cole  and  Mary  A. 
Overby.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  19,  1882, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  21,  1908, 
by  John  A.  Woolf,  and  a  Bishop  Aug. 
22,  1909,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He 
died  Nov.  12,  1908. 

HARRIS,  Thomas  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Tabor  Ward,  Lethbridge  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Aug.  10,  1868,  in  Kaysville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Thomas  E.  Harris  and  Mary 
Ann  Payne.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  10, 
1877,  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  26, 
1898,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  Aug.  14,  1927. 

JOHNSON,  James  Francis,  Bishop 
of  the  Barnwell  Ward,  Lethbridge 
Stake,  Canada,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  April  12,  1879,  at  Spring 
Lake,  Utah,  the  son  of  James  Fi-ancis 
Johnson  and  Rozina  Richmond.  He 
was  baptized  April  17,  1887,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  26,  1924, 
by  Hugh  B.  Brown  and  a  Bishop  Aug. 
18,  1929,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

JOHNSON,  William  Sawyer,  Bishop 
of  the  Barnwell  Ward,  Lethbridge 
Stake,  Canada,  from  1908  to  1915,  was 
born  Nov.  19,  1862,  in  Fountain  Green, 
Utah,  the   son  of  Benjamin  Franklin 


Johnson  and  Harriet  Naomi  Holman. 
He  was  baptized  in  July,  1870,  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  April  9,  1884,  by  Wm.  W. 
Taylor,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  in  1884-1885,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  18,  1908,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

McMULLIN,  Bryant  Ross,  Bishop 
of  the  Barnwell  Ward,  Lethbridge 
Stake,  Canada,  from  1923  to  1929,  was 
born  Jan.  24,  1874,  in  Heber,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Albert  E.  McMuUin  and  Nancy 
J.  Ross.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  20,  1906,  by  Heber  S.  Allen,  and 
a  Bishop  April  26,  1924,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards, 

MILLER,  Abiah  Wadsworth,  Bish- 
op of  the  Starline  Ward,  Lethbridge 
Stake,  Canada,  from  1929  to  1930 -H, 
was  born  July  7,  1883,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  Miller 
and  Lucinda  Wadsworth.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  5,  1891,  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Nov.  5,  1909,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Samoa  in  1910-1914.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  18,  1929,  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

PARKER,  William  Russell,  Bishop 
of  the  Orton  Ward,  Lethbridge  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  23,  1887,  in  Liberty,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  Oscar  F.  Parker  and  Annie 
Watkins.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  2,  1895, 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  9,  1911,  by 
John  S.  Morgan,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Netherlands  in  1912-1914,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  13,  1922,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

PETERSEN,  Parley  Peter,  presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Champion  Branch, 
Lethbridge  Stake,  Canada,  from  1918 
to  1930,  was  born  July  4,  1882,  at 
Spring  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Iver  Pe- 
ter Petersen  and  Caroline  Margrethe 
Sorensen.  He  was  baptized  July  3, 
1890,  moved  to  Canada  in  1902  and  was 
set   apart   as   presiding   Elder   of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


507 


Champion  Branch  in  July,  1918,  by 
Bishop  George  E.  Toone  of  the  Leth- 
bridge  Ward. 

QUIST,  David  Emanuel,  Bishop  of 
Claresholm  Ward,  Lethbridge  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  13,  1884,  in  Big  Cottonwood,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  Anderson  Quist  and 
Mary  C.  Henden.  He  was  baptized 
March  30,  1893,  ordained  an  Elder  Nov. 
1,  1908,  by  Charles  Cole,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Sweden  in  1909-1911.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  July  9, 
1913,  by  Henry  L.  Hinman,  and  a 
Bishop  May  8,  1921,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

SHEPPARD,    John    Hollister,    jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Calgary  Ward,  Leth- 
bridge Stake,  Canada,  from  1927  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  July  4,  1872,  in 
Chiseldon,  Wiltshire,  England,  the  son 
of  John  H.  Sheppard  and  Elizabeth 
Harris.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  24,  1906, 
emigrated  to  America  in  1910,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op May  5,  1928,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

WHITEHEAD,  William  J.,  Bishop 
of  the  Claresholm  Ward,  Lethbridge 
Stake,  Canada,  from  1911  to  1920, 
was  born  April  8,  1864,  in  Franklin, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  William  Whitehead 
and  Margaret  Green.  He  was  baptized 
June  13,  1875,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  19,  1911,  by  Thomas  Duce, 
and  a  Bishop  Nov.  26,  1911. 


Liberty  Stake 


BOWERS,  Frank  Bradley,  Bishop 
of  the  LeGrand  Ward,  Liberty  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  10, 
1892,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  S.  Bowers  and  Esther  Full- 
mer. He  was  baptized  Jan.  5,  1901, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  21,  1926, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith,  and  sustained 
as  Bishop  in  1930. 


BREWSTER,  Sheldon  Riser,  Bisnop 
of  the  Salt  Lake  City  3rd  Ward,  Lib- 
erty Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  20,  1901,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Benjamin  Shel- 
don Brewster  and  Ruby  Myrtle  Hayes, 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  1,  1913,  ordain- 
ed an  Elder  in  June,  1918,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1919-1921.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  20,  1929,  by 
David  0.  McKay. 

BROWNING,  Thomas  Samuel,  Bish- 
op of  the  Salt  Lake  City  3rd  Ward, 
Liberty  Stake,  Utah,  in  1900,  was  born 
April  15,  1860,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Jonathan  Browning  and  Ann 
Emmett.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Australasia  in  1894- 
1897.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  18,  1900,  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith. 

CANNON,  Hugh  J.,  president  of  the 
Liberty  Stake  of  Zion,  Utah,  from 
1904  to  1923,  was  born  Jan.  19,  1870, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  the  son  of  Geo.  Q. 
Cannon  and  Sarah  Jenne.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  Germany  in  1901-1905,  pre- 
siding over  the  German  mission,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Pres. 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  and  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Liberty  Stake  April  1, 
1905.  He  was  chosen  as  mission  presi- 
dent while  he  was  still  in  the  mission 
field.  In  1925-1928  he  again  presided 
over  the  Swiss-German  mission.  He 
died  Oct.  6,  1931. 

CANNON,  William  Telle,  Bishop  of 
the  Liberty  Ward,  Liberty  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1919  to  1920,  was  born  Sept.  7, 
1870,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  son  of 
George  Q.  Cannon  and  Eliza  L.  Telle. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  5,  1878,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Netherlands  and  Bel- 
gium in  1899-1901,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  25,  1916,  by  Hugh  J. 
Cannon,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  24,  1919, 
by  Charles  W.  Penrose. 


508 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


CLAYTON,  John,  Bishop  of  the  3rd 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Liberty  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1911  to  1920,  was  born  Jan. 
7,  1880,  in  Preston,  England,  the  son 
of  William  Clayton  and  Alice  Clayton. 
He  was  baptized  in  1890  by  John  Kay, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Oct.  1,  1911,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

DOXEY,  Graham  Hayes,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  3rd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1929,  was 
born  Jan.  5,  1900,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  G.  Doxey 
and  Peax'l  Hayes.  He  was  baptized 
May  28,  1910,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  2,  1924,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

DUNCAN,  John  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  1st  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1909  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Jan.  8,  1882,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Adam  Duncan 
and  Isabella  Robb.  He  was  baptized 
May  5,  1891,  ordained  an  Elder  Jan. 
14,  1901,  by  Charles  S.  Martin,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1902-1904.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Arnold  Schulthess,  and  a 
Bishop  Oct.  10,  1909,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

EARDLEY,  Roscoe  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  3rd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1906  to  1911  and 
from  1920  to  1924,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  25, 
1906,  by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  235.) 

ELIESON,  Walter  Eli,  Bishop  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  9th  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930,  was 
born  Nov.  24,  1890,  tke  son  of  Gustaf 
Elieson  and  Annetta  Sophia  Anderson. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  Australia  in 
1910-1912,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  18,  1921,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and 
was  sustained  as  Bishop  May  29,  1927. 

FAIRBANKS,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Salt    Lake    City    1st    Ward,    Liberty 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1849  to  1851,  was 
born  March  14,  1810,  in  Peru,  Ver- 
mont, the  son  of  Joseph  Fairbanks 
and  Polly  Brooks.  He  joined  the 
Church  in  1842,  came  to  the  "Valley" 
in  the  fall  of  1847,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Feb.  22,  1849. 

FETZER,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Salt 
Lake  City  8th  Ward,  Liberty  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  30,  1882,  in  Nassenfels,  Bavaria, 
Germany,  the  son  of  Peter  Fetzer  and 
Anna  Seyfert.  He  was  baptized  May 
24,  1900,  and  did  local  missionary  work 
in  Germany.  He  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1905,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  8,  1913,  by  Hugh  J.  Can- 
non, and  a  Bishop  April  27,  1919,  by 
Charles  W.  Penrose. 

GARN,  Daniel,  Bishop  pro  tern,  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  9th  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1849  to  1851,  was 
born  Dec.  13,  1802,  in  St.  Clair,  Bed- 
ford Co.,  Pennsylvania.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  Germany  in  1852-1854,  and 
was  appointed  as  Bishop  pro  tern,  in 
1849.  He  died  April  20,  1872. 

GODDARD,  Joshua  Percy,  Bishop 
of  the  31st  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Lib- 
erty Stake,  Utah,  from  1913  to  1926, 
was  born  Dec.  6,  1879,  in  Kanosh,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Benjamin  Goddard  and  Mar- 
tha A.  Nield.  He  was  baptized  in  May, 
1888,  filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in 
1899-1901,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  7,  1913,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

GRANT,  Joseph  Hyrum,  jun..  Bish- 
op of  the  Salt  Lake  City  33rd  Ward, 
Liberty  Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to 
1928,  was  born  July  20,  1876,  in  Boun- 
tiful, Utah,  the  son  of  Jos.  H.  Grant 
and  Eva  Eliza  Eldredge.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  Colorado  in  1897-1899,  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  21,  1926,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City  in  February,  1929. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


509 


HILL,  Isaac,  Bishop  of  the  Salt  Lake 
City  2nd  Ward,  Liberty  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1854  to  1864,  was  born  Sept.  28, 
1806,  near  Beaver  Brighton,  Beaver 
Co.,  Pennsylvania.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  8,  1844,  by  Isaac 
Higbee,  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  and  a  Bishop 
Dec.  28,  1854,  by  Edward  Hunter. 

HODGSON,  Oliver,  Bishop  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  3rd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1901  to  1906,  was 
born  March  8,  1857,  in  Ovenden,  York- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  Henry  Hodg- 
son and  Mary  Shaw.  He  was  baptized 
in  1865  at  Bradford,  came  to  Utah  in 
1866,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1893-1895  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  11,  1901,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith.  He  was  killed  Feb. 
18,  1932,  by  a  street  car. 

IVERSEN,  Heber  Charles,  Bishop 
of  the  Salt  Lake  City  2nd  Ward,  Lib- 
erty Stake,  Utah,  from  1899  to  1919, 
was  born  July  1,  1868,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  the  son  of  Soren  Iversen  and 
Caroline  Mogensen.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1893- 
1895,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  25,  1899,  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith. 

KINGSBURY,  Joseph  C,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  2nd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1851  to  1854,  was 
born  May  2,  1812,  in  Endfield,  Hart- 
ford Co.,  Conn.,  the  son  of  Solomon 
Kingsbury  and  Amanda  A.  Pease.  He 
was  baptized  Jan.  15,  1832,  in  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  filled  two  missions  in  the 
East,  came  to  Utah  in  1847,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  July  13,  1851.  He 
died  Oct.  15,  1898,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah. 

LEACH,  James,  acting  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  2nd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1871  to  1877,  was 
born  May  2, 1815,  at  Pilling  Lane,  Lan- 
cashire, England,  the  son  of  John 
Leach  and  Margaret  Simpson.  He  was 


baptized  in  November,  1841,  came  to 
Utah  in  1847,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  25,  1865,  by  Samuel  W. 
Richards.  He  died  Jan.  8,  1911. 

MAYCOCK,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  3rd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1895  to  1900,  was 
born  Jan.  13,  1832,  in  Manchester, 
England,  the  son  of  Joseph  Maycock 
and  Lucy  Gillett.  He  was  baptized 
May  18,  1851,  came  to  Utah  in  1859, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
the  fall  of  1861.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1880-1881,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  June  16,  1895, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith. 

MERRILL,  Lewis  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  31st  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1908  to  1911,  was 
born  June  23,  1874,  in  Richmond, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Marriner  W.  Merrill 
and  Almira  Lewis.  He  was  baptized 
June  23,  1882,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  30,  1907,  by  Hugh  J.  Cannon, 
and  a  Bishop  in  1908.  He  died  June 
1,  1915,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

MICHELSEN,  Fred  M.,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Liberty  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  26,  1874,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  the 
son  of  James  M.  Michelsen  and  Caro- 
lina Larson.  He  was  baptized  June 
5,  1883,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  26,  1904,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

MOON,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the  Salt 
Lake  City  1st  Ward,  Liberty  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1856  to  1870,  was  bo*-n 
March  29,  1819,  at  Chorley,  Lanca- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  Robert 
Moon  and  Ann  Walton.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  6,  1838,  came  to  Utah  in 
1850,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  21,  1856.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  the  United  States  in  1871- 
1872. 

OLSEN,  Hyrum  G.,  Bishop  of  the 
Liberty  Ward,   Liberty   Stake,   Utah, 


510 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


from  1915  to  1919,  was  born  Dec.  14, 
1868,  in  Christiania,  Norway,  the  son 
of  Guldbrand  Olsen  and  Karen  Si- 
monsen.  He  was  baptized  in  July,  1878, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  22,  1907, 
by  Hugh  J.  Cannon,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  6,  1915,  by  Charles  W. 
Penrose. 

PETERSON,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  2nd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1890,  was 
born  Dec.  1,  1826,  on  the  island  of 
Bornholm,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Peter 
P.  Peterson  and  Ellen  M.  Hansen.  He 
was  baptized  in  1852,  came  to  Utah  in 
1853,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  March 
15,  1858,  filled  a  mission  to  Sweden  in 
1867-1870,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op June  8,  1877,  by  John  Taylor. 

PROCTOR,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Salt 
Lake  City  10th  Ward,  Liberty  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1867  to  1874,  was  born 
Sept.  21,  1822,  in  Preston,  Lancashire, 
England,  the  son  of  John  and  Sarah 
Proctor.  He  was  baptized  in  England, 
emigrated  to  Nauvoo,  HI.,  in  1841,  and 
to  Utah  in  1850,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  in  January,  1867.  He  died  Feb. 
12,  1874. 

RASMUSSEN,     Alma     Emanuel, 

Bishop  of  the  Emigration  Ward,  Lib- 
erty Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  1,  1882,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Niels  Rasmussen  and  Laura 
Marie  Thorup.  He  was  baptized  in 
September,  1890,  was  ordained  an  El- 
der June  9,  1902,  by  his  father,  filled 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1902-1905, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  14, 
1927,  by  Geo.  Careless,  and  a  Bishop 
Jan.  19,  1930,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

ROMNEY,  Gaskell,  Bishop  of  the 
Yale  Ward,  Liberty  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1926  to  1930,  was  born  Sept.  21,  1871, 
in  St.  George,  Utah,  the  son  of  Miles 
P.  Romney  and  Hannah  E.  Hill.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  18,  1879,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1900- 


1902,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop 
Jan.  31,  1926,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

SHARP,  June  Bennion,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  31st  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930,  was 
born  Jan.  17,  1892,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
the  son  of  John  Adam  Sharp  and  Re- 
becca Bennion.  He  was  baptized  March 
3,  1900,  ordained  an  Elder  by  Edwai'd 
H.  Eardley  May  13,  1912,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  South  Africa  in  1912-1915. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  19,  1926,  by  Pres.  Heber 
J.  Grant. 

SMITH,  George  Alfred,  Bishop  of 
the  LeGrande  Ward,  Liberty  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1928,  was  born 
Sept.  11,  1869,  in  Lehi,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Jesse  Smith  and  Mary  Ann  Price. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
1,  1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a 
Bishop  Feb.  17,  1924,  by  Pres.  Heber 
J.  Grant.  He  died  Jan.  23,  1931. 

SMITH,  Hyrum  Joseph,  Bishop  of 
the  Liberty  Ward,  Liberty  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1907  to  1915,  was  born  April 
27,  1868,  in  Leicester,  England,  the 
son  of  Charles  Dickens  Smith  and 
Mary  Darkins.  He  was  baptized  in 
April,  1880,  and  was-  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  22,  1907,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

STEVENS,  Stringham  A.,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Liberty  Stake  of  Zion,  Utah,  in 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  18,  1884,  in  Og- 
den,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Stevens 
and  Mariah  Stringham.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  20,  1892,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  20,  1917,  by  Arnold 
H.  Schulthess. 

STRINGHAM,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 

Liberty  Ward,  Liberty  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
7,  1865,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


511 


I 


son  of  Briant  Stringham  and  Harriet 
Maria  Ashby.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  23,  1919,  by  Hugh  J.  Cannon, 
and  a  Bishop  Jan.  21,  1926,  by  George 
Albert  Smith. 

WARD,  Joseph  Frank,  Bishop  of 
the  Emigration  Ward,  Liberty  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930,  was  born 
Dec.  28,  1882,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Joseph  Harvey  Ward  and 
Sarah  Maria  Terry.  He  was  baptized 
June  30,  1891,  ordained  an  Elder  June 
7,  1904,  by  Arthur  W.  Brown,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Swiss-German  Mis- 
sion in  1904-1907,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  27, 
1925,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

WELLING,  Arthur,  Bishop  of  the 
Liberty  Ward,  Liberty  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1926,  was  born  Dec.  18, 
1877,  in  Farmington,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Job  Welling  and  Mariette  Holmes. 
He  was  baptized  July  25,  1886,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Dec.  24,  1920,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

WILLIAMS,  Christopher,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  3rd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1849  to  1856,  was 
born  March  7,  1789,  in  Plattekill,  Ul- 
ster Co.,  New  York,  the  son  of  Icha- 
bod  Williams  and  Sybil  Clark.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Willard 
Snow  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Feb.  22,  1849. 

WIRTHLIN,  Joseph  Leopold,  Bish- 
op of  the  Salt  Lake  City  33rd  Ward, 
Liberty  Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  14,  1893,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  the  son  of  Joseph 
Wirthlin  and  Emma  Hillstead.  He  was 
baptized  in  June,  1902,  and  after  be- 
ing ordained  an  Elder  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Swiss  and  German  Mis- 
sion in  1913-1914.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Feb.  25,  1926,  by  Charles 
W.  Nibley,  and  a  Bishop  April  22, 
1928,  by  James   E.   Talmage. 


YOUNG,  Phineas  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  2nd  Ward,  Liberty 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1864  to  1871,  was 
born  Feb.  16,  1799,  in  Hopkinton, 
Middlesex  Co.,  Mass.,  the  son  of  John 
Young  and  Nabby  Howe.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  5,  1832,  and  filled  several 
missions  for  the  Church.  He  came  to 
Utah  in  July,  1847,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Dec.  1,  1864.  He  died  Oct. 
10,  1879. 


Logan  Stake 


ANDERSON,  Anton  Edward,  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Logan  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  20,  1873,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Anthon  Anderson  and  Mary  Hen- 
derson. He  was  baptized  in  April,  1881, 
was  oi-dained  an  Elder  Nov.  3,  1895, 
by  Niels  C.  Edlefsen,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  England  in  1904-1906.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  7,  1911, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Logan  Stake 
presidency,  Oct.  19,  1930. 

BARFUSS,  Christian,  Bishop  of  the 
River  Heights  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1928,  was  born 
Aug.  11,  1862,  in  Bern,  Switzerland, 
a  son  of  Christian  Barfuss  and  Maria 
Aschbacher.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  17, 
1884,  came  to  Utah  that  same  year, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Rud- 
ger Clawson,  and  a  Bishop  April  24, 
1921,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

BUDGE,  Oliver  Hyer,  president  of 
the  Logan  Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to 
1930,  was  born  April  3,  1872,  in  Paris, 
Idaho,  a  son  of  William  Budge  and 
Ann  Hyer.  He  was  baptized  when  nine 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  7, 
1896,  by  Christian  D.  Fjeldsted  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Switzerland  and 
Germany  in  1896-1899.  He  was  set 
apart  as  stake  president  June  5,  1920, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

BUDGE,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Providence  Ward,  Logan  Stake,  Utah, 


512 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


from  1864  to  1870,  was  born  May  1, 
1828,  in  Lanark,  Scotland,  a  son  of 
William  Budge  and  Mary  Scott.  He 
was  baptized  Dec.  31,  1848,  labored 
for  ten  years  as  a  local  missionary  in 
Scotland,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1860, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Feb.  10,  1864,  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young.  He  acted  as  president  of  the 
Bear  Lake  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1870 
to  1906,  and  died  March  18,  1919.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  451.) 

CAMPBELL,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the 
Providence  2nd  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1909  to  1923,  was  born  Oct. 
26,  1861,  in  Providence,  a  son  of  Jos. 
Hyrum  Campbell  and  Elizabeth  Math- 
ews. He  was  baptized  June  18,  1871, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1891-1893,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  1,  1909,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

CROCKETT,  Hyrum  Enos,  Bishop 
of  the  Logan  7th  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1913  to  1917,  was  born 
April  6,  1873,  in  Logan,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Alvin  Crockett  and  Mary  So- 
phia Reed.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  2,  1913,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards.  He  died  at  Logan 
Dec.  23,  1935. 

DUNN,  Charles  Welch,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Logan  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  April  16, 
1885,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Charles  O.  Dunn  and  Martha  Jane 
Welch.  He  was  baptized  June  11,  1893, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  July  20, 
1912,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith,  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  in  the  Stake 
presidency  Oct.  19,  1930,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

ENGLAND,  Charles,  Bishop  of  the 
Logan  2nd  Ward,  Logan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1917  to  1930  + ,  was  born  Oct. 
6,  1863,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wm. 
England  and  Eliza  Scamons.  He  was 
baptized  July  7,  1872,  was  ordained  a 


High  Priest  Nov.  6,  1887,  by  Lorenzo 
Snow,  and  filled  two  missions,  one  to 
England  in  1889-1891,  and  one  to  the 
Southwestern  States  in  1891-1893.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  14,  1917, 
by   Stephen   L.   Richards. 

HAMMOND,  Andrew  Murray,  Bish- 
op of  the  Providence  1st  Ward,  Logan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  28,  1875,  in  Providence, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Milton  D.  Hammond 
and  Kirsti  Transtrom.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  28,  1883,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty May  4,  1898,  by  John  Henry 
Smith,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  in  1898-1900,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  2,  1909,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  a  Bishop  April 
24,  1921,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

JOHNSON,  Niels  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Logan  8th  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1917,  was  born 
Mai'ch  21,  1871,  in  Viborg,  Denmark, 
a  son  of  Jens  Peter  Jensen  and  Anna 
Poikjan.  He  was  baptized  June  16, 
1886,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  4,  1908,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

LINFORD,  James  Wesley,  Bishop 
of  the  Logan  12th  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  26,  1875,  in  Paris,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  Joseph  William  Linford  and  Mary 
Bratton  Rich.  He  was  baptized  May 
28,  1883,  was  ordained  an  Elder  Sept. 
22,  1901,  by  Elijah  C.  Keetch,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  from 
1901  to  1904.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  3,  1912,  and  a  Bishop  June 
19,  1921,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

MATHEWS,  Hazen  Poulsen,  Bish- 
op of  the  Providence  2nd  Wai'd,  Logan 
Stake,  Utah,  from.  1924  to  1927,  was 
born  May  24,  1887,  in  Providence, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Alma  Morris  Mathews 
and  Sophie  Poulsen.  He  was  baptized 
June  11,  1895,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  in  1912-1914,  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


513 


was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op April  14,  1924,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage. 

MERKLEY,  Nathaniel  W.,  Bishop 
of  the  Logan  2nd  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1916  to  1917,  and  Bishop 
of  the  Logan  1st  Ward,  from  1917 
to  1920,  was  born  Sept.  20,  1883,  in 
St.  Charles,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Jacob  N. 
Merkley  and  Annie  T.  Wilhelmsen. 
He  was  baptized  July  10,  1892,  or- 
dained an  Elder  Sept.  26,  1908,  by  He- 
ber  C.  C.  Rich,  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia, was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  3,  1912,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and 
a  Bishop  March  6,  1916,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

MERRILL,  Lorin  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Logan  7th  Ward,  Logan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1907  to  1913,  was  born  April  4, 
1876,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Marriner  W.  Merrill  and  Elmira  J. 
Bainbridge.  He  was  baptized  May  1, 
1884,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  25,  1908,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

PEDERSEN,  Hans  Andreas,  second 
counselor  in  the  Logan  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1920  to  1921,  was 
born  Aug.  13,  1862,  in  Bjarko,  Nor- 
way, a  son  of  Peder  Hansen  and  Ra- 
chel Olene  Chi'istensen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  23,  1876,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1881,  filled  two  missions  to  Norway 
in  1891-1893,  and  1899-1901,  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  March  7,  1920,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards  and  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Logan  Stake 
presidency  June  5,  1920,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard.    He   died   Oct.   5,   1921. 

PEDERSEN,  Olof  Ignatius,  Bishop 
of  the  Logan  6th  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1930  +  ,  Avas  born 
Dec.  16,  1865,  in  Christiania,  Norway, 
a  son  of  Ole  Pedersen  and  Ingeborg 
Hansen.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1883, 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1900- 
1902,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
5,  1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 


PETERSON,  Victor  Emanuel,  Bish- 
op of  the  Logan  8th  Ward,  Logan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 -|-,  was 
born  Dec.  6,  1887,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Emanuel  Peterson  and  Martha 
Stensen.  He  was  baptized  July  3,  1897, 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  31,  1910,  by 
Geo.  D.  Cardon,  filled  a  mission  to 
Sweden  in  1910-1912,  and  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  21, 
1923,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

RICE,  Oscar  Franklin,  Bishop  of 
the  Logan  6th  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1920,  was  born 
March  17,  1870,  in  Providence,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Oscar  North  Rice  and  Jane 
C.  Miller.  He  was  baptized  in  1882, 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  1907  by  Charles 
H.  Hart,  filled  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States  in  1908-1910,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan. 
21,  1910,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

SATTERTHWAITE,    Orson    Pratt, 

Bishop  of  the  Logan  11th  Ward,  Lo- 
gan Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 -|-,  was  born 
Aug.  2,  1875,  in  Pine  Valley,  Warren 
Co.,  Indiana,  a  son  of  Joshua  W.  Sat- 
terthwaite  and  Frances  Jane  Stowe. 
He  came  to  Utah  in  1882,  was  bap- 
tized in  1883,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  11,  1910,  by  Jos.  R.  Shepherd, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  April  20,  1930, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

SCHENK,  John  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  College  Ward,  Logan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan. 
8,  1885,  in  Providence,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  Schenk  and  Elizabeth  Aschbach- 
er.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  8,  1893,  or- 
dained an  Elder  April  9,  1910,  by  his 
father  and  filled  a  mission  to  Switzer- 
land and  Germany  in  1905-1908.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  30, 
1912,  by  Milton  H.  Welling,  and  a 
Bishop  July  7,  1929,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

SCHOLES,  Walter  Adam,  Bishop 
of   the    River   Heights    Ward,    Logan 


Vol.  IV,  No.  33 


Aug.   15,   1936 


514 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  April  8,  1895,  in  Laie,  Oahu,  Ha- 
waii, a  son  of  Walter  Scholes  and 
Phoebe  L.  Adams,  while  his  parents 
were  laboring  as  missionaries  in  Ha- 
waii. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  18,  1925,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard, 
and  a  Bishop  Oct.  20,  1928,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney. 

SLOAN,  William  Reed,  Bishop  of 
the  Logan  2nd  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1911  to  1916,  was  born 
March  30,  1881,  in  Manti,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Hugh  Russell  Sloan  and  Mar- 
garet Violet  Reed.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  4,  1889,  ordained  a  Seventy  July 
13,  1900,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
in  1900-1902.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  23,  1903,  by  Heber  S.  Al- 
len, and  a  Bishop  by  Mathias  F.  Cow- 
ley (Kimball  Ward,  Canada).  He  acted 
as  president  of  the  Northwestern 
States  Mission  in   1927-1934. 

THATCHER,  Brigham  Guy,  Bishop 
of  the  Logan  1st  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1906  to  1917,  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Aug.  5,  1906,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  357.) 

THEURER,  Frederich,  Bishop  of 
the  Providence  Wai'd,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1889  to  1909,  was  bora 
Sept.  29,  1839,  in  Argay,  Switzerland, 
a  son  of  Michael  Theurer  and  Barbara 
Horlacher.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  5, 
1857,  in  Switzerland,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1859,  and  filled  two  mis- 
sions to  Switzerland  and  Germany  in 
1874-1876  and  1885-1887.  Later  he  was 
oi'dained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop.  He 
died  Feb.  8,  1922. 

THOMAS,  James  Richard,  Bishop  of 
the  Logan  11th  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1928,  was  born 
Nov.  17,  1865,  in  Paradise,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Wm.  Nash  Thomas  and  Eliza- 
beth Lallis.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  the 


Eastern  States  in  1898-1900  as  a  SeV- 
enty,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  6,  1920,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards, 
and  a  Bishop  Jan.  5,  1920,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards. 

WATKINS,  Joseph  Hammond,  jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Logan  7th  Ward,  Logan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1930 -h, 
was  born  Dec.  12,  1885,  in  Brigham 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jos.  H.  Watkins 
and  Ella  Hancock.  He  was  baptized 
Dec.  12,  1893,  ordained  an  Elder  Feb. 
7,  1907,  by  Martin  Jensen,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States  in  1907- 
1909,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  3,  1917,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith. 

WOOD,  John  Karl,  Bishop  of  the 
River  Heights  Ward,  Logan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1921,  was  born 
June  29,  1890,  in  Rich  Ward,  Morgan 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Wood  and 
Emeline  Crouch.  He  was  baptized 
June  29,  1898,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  4,  1917, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

WORLEY,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Logan  1st  Ward,  Logan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  July 
19,  1864,  in  Birmingham,  England,  a 
son  of  Henry  Worley  and  Catherine 
Willmore.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1869, 
was  baptized  in  June,  1877,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  28,  1900,  by 
Marriner  W.  Merrill,  and  a  Bishop 
June  5,  1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 


Los   Angeles   Stake 

BAKER,  John  Frederick,  Bishop  of 
the  Huntington  Park  Ward,  Los  An- 
geles Stake,  California,  from  1923  to 
1928,  was  born  Sept.  5,  1877,  in  Bill- 
ingsbach,  Wurtemberg,  Germany,  a 
son  of  Johann  Michael  Boger  and 
Katharina  Barbara  Hammel.  He  was 
baptized  April  27,  1900,  in  Dublin,  Ire- 
land, came  to  America  in   1920,  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


515 


was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  19,  1923,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

BOREN,  Leroy,  Bishop  of  the  San 
Pedro  Ward,  Los  Angeles  Stake,  Cali- 
fornia, from  1925  to  1930,  was  born 
July  3,  1882,  in  Wallsburg,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Ephraim  DeCabe  Boren  and 
Eliza  R.  McPhee.  He  was  baptized 
June  16,  1893  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  26,  1925,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

CHENEY,  David  Pierce,  Bishop  of 
the  Belvedere  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  from  1923  to  1930, 
was  born  July  10,  1879,  in  Springville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  David  Cheney  and  Lo- 
dima  Hutchings.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  4.  1887,  ordained  a  Seventy  July 
20,  1900,  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley,  filled 
a  mission  to  Holland  and  Belgium  in 
1900-1903,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  21,  1905,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  pi'esided  over 
the  Chapin  Ward,  Teton  Stake. 

COLLINGS,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Matthews  Ward,  Los  Angeles  Stake, 
California,  from  1925  to  1930 -h,  was 
boz*n  Nov.  25,  1890,  in  Paris,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  James  Collings  and  Frances 
Rich.  He  was  baptized  May  6,  1899, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
April  26, 1925,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

COVINGTON,    Joseph     W  i  11  a  r  d. 

Bishop  of  the  San  Pedro  Ward,  Los 
Angeles  Stake,  California,  from  1923 
to  1925,  was  born  Aug.  8,  1879,  in 
Oi'derville,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Thomas 
Covington  and  Johanna  Lundblad.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  13,  1887,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Jan.  10,  1911,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop  April  22,  1923, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

DAVIES,  Joseph  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
the  Manchester  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  June  11,  1901,  at  Portage, 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  E.  Davies  and 


Lucy  J.  Glover.  He  was  baptized  July 
11,  1909,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
26,  1928,  by  Leo.  J.  Muir,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  7,  1930,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

DYE,  Samuel  Benjamin,  Bishop  of 
the  Home  Gardens  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  from  1923  to  1928, 
was  born  Sept.  27,  1879,  at  Walnut 
Ridge,  Arkansas,  a  son  of  George  Dye 
and  Nancy  J.  Ulmer.  He  became  a 
convert  and  was  baptized  Oct.  25,  1897, 
was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and 
took  an  active  part  in  Church  activities 
in  Texas.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  27,  1924,  by  Lars  J.  Larsen 
and  a  Bishop  Dec.  14,  1924,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

HANSEN,  Willard,  Bishop  of  the 
Huntington  Park  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  in  1930,  was  born 
Feb.  27,  1876,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Willard  S.  Hansen  and 
Maria  Larson.  He  was  baptized  May 
4,  1884,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
16,  1905,  by  Frank  Y.  Taylor,  and  a 
Bishop  in  1923.  He  acted  as  Bishop 
of  the  Long  Beach  Ward  from  1923 
to  1924. 

HATCH,  Fred  Stevens,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Los  Angeles  Stake  presi- 
dency, California,  from  1927  to  1928, 
was  born  Dec.  24,  1869,  in  Little  Gene- 
see, N.  Y.,  the  son  of  Geo.  W.  Hatch 
and  Livera  A.  Hatch.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  June,  1920,  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  May  22,  1927. 

KIMBALL,  Jonathan  G.,  jun..  Bish- 
op of  the  San  Pedro  Ward,  Los  An- 
geles Stake,  California,  in  1930 +  ,  was 
born  June  20,  1890,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Jonathan  G.  Kimball  and  Jennie 
K.  Knowlton.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
3,  1898,  ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
26,  1925,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant,  and 
a  Bishop  Feb.  22,  1931,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

NIELSEN,  Hans  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Adams  Ward,  Los  Angeles  Stake,  Cal- 


516 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ifornia,  from  1923  to  1925,  was  born 
Dec.  31,  1876,  in  Hyrum,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Hans  Enoch  Nielsen  and  Mary  Os- 
borne. He  was  baptized  Aug.  8,  1886, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  March  11,  1923,  by  Pres.  Heber 
J.  Grant, 

PARRY,  Morris  Roberts,  Bishop  of 
the  Home  Gardens  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  24,  1886,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Owen  R.  Parry 
and  Elizabeth  Jones.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  1,  1899,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1907-1909,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  5,  1928,  by  Ivan 
Magnussen,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  9,  1928, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

PUGH,  Charles  Vastine,  Bishop  of 
the  Long  Beach  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  from  1924  to  1927, 
was  born  Oct.  2,  1885,  in  Clarinda, 
Iowa,  a  son  of  Daniel  Smith  Pugh  and 
Anna  Marie  Draper.  He  was  baptized 
May  2,  1914,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  13,  1923,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  9,  1924,  by  Mel- 
vin  J.  Ballard. 

SIMMONS,  Wallace,  Bishop  of  the 
Manchester  Ward,  Los  Angeles  Stake, 
California,  from  1927  to  1929,  was  born 
Oct.  19,  1883,  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Jonathan  Simmons  and 
Elizabeth  Waugh.  He  was  baptized 
July  7,  1892,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  26,  1928,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richai'ds. 

SPONGBERG,  Virgil  Heller,  Bishop 
of  the  Virginia  Ward,  Los  Angeles 
Stake,  California,  from  1925  to  1930 -|-, 
was  born  Dec.  4,  1894,  in  Preston,  Ida- 
ho, a  son  of  Charles  J.  Spongberg  and 
Evelyn  Heller.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
8,  1903,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  14,  1924,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard, 
and  a  Bishop  Aug.  23,  1925,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith,  jun. 

WEST,  Joseph  Anderson,  Bishop  of 
the  Adams  Ward,  Los  Angeles  Stake, 


California,  from  1927  to  1930,  was  born 
Oct.  5,  1867,  in  Parowan,  Utah,  a  son 
of  John  A.  West  and  Mary  J.  Robin- 
son. He  was  baptized  Oct.  5,  1875, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  29, 
1907,  by  Nephi  L.  Morris,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  4,  1927,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

WRIDE,  George  T.,  Bishop  of  the 
Matthews  Ward,  Los  Angeles  Stake, 
California,  from  1923  to  1925,  was 
born  Nov.  7,  1874,  in  Payson,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Barry  Wride  and  Hannah  Sel- 
man.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  2,  1882, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  12,  1922,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman, 

YOUKSTETTER,  Wilhelm  Gottlieb, 

Bishop  of  the  Huntington  Park  Ward, 
Los  Angeles  Stake,  California,  from 
1928  to  1930,  was  born  June  27,  1874, 
at  Kesselfeld,  Ohringen,  Germany,  a 
son  of  Michael  Youkstetter  and  Wil- 
helmine  Geist.  He  was  baptized  March 
28,  1901,  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  came  to 
America  in  1922,  and  located  in  Hunt- 
ington Park,  California.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Feb.  19,  1923,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop 
May  26,  1928,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 


Lost  River  Stake 

ANDERSEN,  J,  Wesley,  Bishop  of 
the  Moore  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1923  to  1930,  was  born 
Nov.  3,  1887,  at  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Jonathan  N.  Andersen  and 
Ellen  M.  Tingey.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  3,  1895,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  18,  1919,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard, and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct,  28, 
1923,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

ASAY,  Eleazer,  jun.,  Bishop  of  the 
Leslie  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb. 
8,  1892,  in  Monroe,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Eleazer  Asay  and  Emmeline  Zenetta 
Windsor.     He   was   baptized   Aug.   6, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


517 


1900,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  April  24,  1926,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

BILLS,  John  Lorenzo,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Lost  River  Stake  presi- 
dency, Idaho,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  13,  1889,  in  Milwaukee,  Wiscon- 
sin, a  son  of  Reinier  Smoldero  Bills 
and  Mary  Rosa  Newman.  He  was 
baptized  June  3,  1899,  came  to  Utah 
in  1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  18,  1925,  by  John  Wells, 
and  a  Bishop  Jan.  17,  1926,  by  Richard 
R.  L>man.  He  presided  over  the  Mack- 
ay  Ward  in  1925-1930,  and  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  in  the  Stake 
presidency  April  20,  1930,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

BOYER,  Ira  Wayne,  Bishop  of  the 
Arco  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec,  12,  1883,  in 
Springville,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Sell 
Boyer  and  Julia  Ann  Crandall.  He 
was  baptized  in  1892,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  6,  1921,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  July  6, 
1930,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

CAMMOCK,  Francis,  Bishop  of  the 
Ballard  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
in  1924,  was  born  Nov.  29,  1879,  in 
Mallory,  Nottinghamshii-e,  England. 
He  was  baptized  April  16,  1890,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  24,  1913,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  April  26,  1924,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richai'ds. 

COOK,  Edwin  C,  Bishop  of  the  Les- 
lie Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1922  to  1926,  was  born  Dec.  19, 
1887,  in  Dingle,  Idaho,  a  son  of  George 
Henry  Cook  and  Elizabeth  H.  Nate. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  the  Western 
States  in  1909-1912,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  20,  1914,  by  Joseph 
R.  Shepherd,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  4, 
1922,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith.  He  had 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Dingle  Ward, 
Montpelier  Stake,  from  1917  to  1919. 


DUKE,  Vern  V.,  Bishop  of  the 
Moore  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1920  to  1923,  was  born  Nov.  3, 
1891,  in  Santaquin,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Robert  S.  Duke  and  Margaret  E.  Van 
Ausdal.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  7,  1902, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  12,  1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

CHAMBERLAIN,  Thomas,  Bishop 
of  the  Arco  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1920  to  1923,  was  born 
May  24,  1876,  in  Orderville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Thomas  Chamberlain  and  Laura 
Fackrell.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1899-1901  and  was 
oi'dained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  27,  1920,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HARRIS,  John  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Moore  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
in  1920  (from  March  to  December), 
was  born  April  19,  1886,  in  Cornish, 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  J.  Harris  and 
Jessie  L.  Freckleton.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  18,  1919,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard,  and  a  Bishop  March  28, 
1920,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

JENSEN,  Andrew  C,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Moore  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1906  to  1910,  was  born 
Jan.  15,  1875,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Andrew  C.  Jensen,  sen.,  and 
Annie  M.  Carlson.  He  was  baptized 
July  9,  1883,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Jan.  13,  1906,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

JENSEN,  Walter  Anton,  president 
of  the  Lost  River  Stake  of  Zion,  Idaho, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  4,  1883,  in 
Logan,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jens  Anton 
Jensen  and  Elsie  Andreasen.  He  was 
baptized  in  April,  1892,  filled  a  mission 
to  Germany  in  1902-1904,  moved  to  the 
Lost  River  Stake  in  1914,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  in  1914,  and  set  apart 
April  20,  1930,  by  David  O.  McKay  as 
president  of  the  Lost  River  Stake. 

JOHNSON,  John  Adam,  Bishop  of 
the  Arco  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Ida- 


518 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ho,  from  1923  to  1930,  was  born  May 
20,  1881,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Niels  Johnson  and  Margaret  Rasmus- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  5,  1889, 
filled  a  mission  to  Norway  in  1903- 
1905,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
7,  1922,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman  and  a 
Bishop  Feb.  4,  1923,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

KNIGHTON,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Moore  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  18,  1882,  in 
South  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam Knighton  and  Mary  Ann  Stacey. 
He  was  baptized  June  22,  1890,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  7,  1922,  by 
Richai'd  R.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  April 
20,  1930,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

LOWRY,  William  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Arco  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1912  to  1919,  was  born  Dec.  21, 
1857,  in  Manti,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
Lowry  and  Sarah  J.  Brown.  He  was 
baptized  July  13,  1867,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1902-1903, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  18,  1912,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith. 

MICKELSEN,  Henry  N.,  Bishop  of 
the  Arco  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake, 
from  1919  to  1920,  and  Bishop  of 
the  Lost  River  Ward,  Lost  River 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1923,  was 
born  Dec.  29,  1878,  in  Denmark,  a  son 
of  Anton  Peter  Mickelsen  and  Getta 
Jensen.  He  was  baptized  July  2,  1910, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Western  States 
in  1914-1915,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  18,  1919,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

NELSON,  Victor  Daniel,  Bishop  of 
the  Darlington  Ward,  Lost  River 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Aug.  24,  1889,  in  Ferron,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Hyrum  A.  Nelson  and  Mary  A. 
Lowry.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  5,  1897, 
ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  19,  1910,  by 
Christian  Petersen,  filled  a  mission  to 
Norway  in  1910-1912  and  was  ordained 


a  Bishop  Feb.  4,   1923,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

NIELSEN,  Wyman  Isaac,  Bishop  of 
the  Mackay  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake, 
Idaho,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  15, 
1888,  in  Draper,  Utah,  a  son  of  Peter 
Anton  Nielsen  and  Olivia  Jensen.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  2,  1897,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  22,  1930, 
and  a  Bishop  July  6,  1930,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards. 

SORENSEN,  Willard  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Moore  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1919  to  1920,  was  born 
March  19,  1889,  in  Trout  Creek,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  John  P.  Sorensen  and  Sena 
C.  Mickelsen.  He  was  baptized  July 
31,  1897,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  18,  1919,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

TEW,  Warren  S.,  Bishop  of  the  Bal- 
lard Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1923,  was  born  Jan.  28, 
1891,  at  Mapleton,  Utah,  the  son  of 
William  T.  Tew  and  Clara  Eliza  Snow. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  27,  1899,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug. 
18,  1919,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

WALKER,  Franklin,  Bishop  of  the 
Leslie  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1922,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  18,  1919, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

WEST,.Erastus,  Bishop  of  the  Dar- 
lington Wax'd,  Lost  River  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1923,  was  born  Jan.  10, 
1867,  in  Parowan,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
A.  West  and  Betsey  Jane  Fish.  He 
was  baptized  in  1877,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  18,  1919, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

WHITING,  Lucius  Burr,  Bishop  of 
the  Ballard  Ward,  Lost  River  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1924  to  1927,  was  born 
Oct.  1,  1878,  at  Springville,  Utah.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  3,  1895,  ordained  a 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


519 


High  Priest  April  26,  1924,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct. 
18,  1924.  The  Ballard  Ward  was  dis- 
organized in  1927. 


Lyman  Stake 


ROLLINS,  Henry  Melvin,  Bishop  of 
the  Lyman  Ward,  Lyman  Stake,  Wyo- 
ming, fi'om  1916  to  1926,  was  born  May 
26,  1886,  in  Minersville,  Utah,  a  son 
of  James  Watson  Rollins  and  Harriet 
Ann  Eyre.  He  was  baptized  in  1894, 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  2,  1909,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northwestern  States  in  1909-1911, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  11, 
1912,  by  Daniel  Gerrard,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  April  30,  1916,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

SHARP,  James,  Bishop  of  the  Mill- 
burne  Ward,  Lyman  Stake,  Wyoming, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June 
28,  1872,  in  Heber,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Jonathan  Sharp  and  Annie  Jowett.  He 
was  baptized  Dec.  18,  1892,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  16,  1915,  by 
Thomas  Tingey,  and  a  Bishop  Jan.  20, 
1929,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

WALKER,  John  Calvin,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Lyman  Stake  presidency, 
Wyoming,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Aug.  24,  1878,  in  Eden,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  E.  Walker  and  Margaret 
Colvin.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  4,  1886, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1908-1910,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug  11,  1912,  by  Thomas 
J.  Tingey,  and  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  in  the  Lyman  Stake  presi- 
dency July  18,  1926,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 


Malad  Stake 


BEETON,  James  Andrew,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodruff  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  7,  1897, 
in  Marsh  Valley,  Oneida  Co.,  Idaho,  a 


son  of  William  Beeton,  jun.,  and  Mar- 
garet Ann  Knudsen.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  7,  1905,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  11,  1931,  by  Thomas  W.  Richards, 
and  oi'dained  a  Bishop  April  12,  1931, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

BLAISDELL,  John  Edward,  Bishop 
of  the  Saint  John  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 -f-,  was  born 
May  11,  1884,  in  Centerville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Reuben  R.  Blaisdell  and  Mary 
White.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  5,  1892, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  18,  1918, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  April  14,  1929,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

CONLEY,  John  Franklin,  Bishop  of 
the  Portage  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1909  to  1918,  was  born  Oct. 
18,  1865,  in  Farmington,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Conley  and  Lydia 
Thornton.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  1, 
1874,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  Samoa  in  1895-1899,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  17,  1899, 
by  Fi-ancis  M.  Lyman,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  April  6,  1909,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

CROWTHER,     Edward     Nehemiah, 

second  counselor  in  the  Malad  Stake 
presidency,  Idaho,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  13,  1889,  in 
Laketown,  Utah,  a  son  of  Edward 
Crowther  and  Mary  Weston.  He  was 
baptized  March  16,  1897,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia in  1910-1912,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  4,  1915,  by  James  P. 
Harrison,  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  Oct.  21,  1928,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

DUNFORD,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Malad  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1877  to  1880,  was  born  Dec.  15,  1822, 
at  Trowbridge,  Wiltshire,  England,  a 
son  of  John  Dunford  and  Mary  Blair. 
He  was  baptized  in  1846,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1852,  carried  on  a  successful 
business  in  Salt  Lake  City  and  visited 


520 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Palestine  and  other  countries  in  1872- 
1873.  He  was  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  Saints  in  Malad  Valley  June  19, 
1877,  and  died  in  Salt  Lake  City  Feb. 
17,  1891. 

EVANS,  Jonah,  Bishop  of  the  Sa- 
maria Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1880  to  1897,  was  born  Feb.  26,  1838, 
in  South  Wales,  a  son  of  John  Evans 
and  Esther  Williams.  He  was  baptized 
April  5,  1860,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1863,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  31,  1880.  He  died 
Jan.  22,  1897. 

EVANS,  Thomas  Jones  Davis,  Bish- 
op of  the  Malad  First  Ward,  Malad 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1923  to  1930,  was 
born  May  1,  1885,  in  Malad,  Idaho,  a 
son  of  Benjamin  D.  Evans  and  Mary 
Jane  Jones.  He  was  baptized  May  6, 
1893,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1920-1922,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  16,  1924,  by 
Rudger   Clawson. 

FACER,  George  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Cherry  Creek  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1902  to  1903,  was  born 
Nov.  13,  1858,  in  Eynesburry,  Hunt- 
ingtonshire,  England,  a  son  of  George 
Facer  and  Mary  Prior.  He  was  bap- 
tized Nov.  13,  1866,  emigrated  with 
his  parents  in  1860,  and  was  oitlained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  22, 
1902,  by  Matthias  F.  Cowley. 

FUHRIMAN,  Godfrey  Jared,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Ridgedale  Branch, 
Malad  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1925, 
was  born  Aug.  22,  1883,  in  Providence, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Godfrey 
Fuhriman  and  Bertha  Frederick.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  22,  1891,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
Germany  in  1911-1913,  and  was  set 
apart  as  presiding  Elder  June  28,  1915. 
He  died  April  6,  1924. 

GIBBS,  James  Hyrum,  Bishop  of  the 
Portaee    Ward.    Malad    Stake     Idaho. 


from  1899  to  1909,  was  born  June  15, 
1860,  in  South  Wales,  a  son  of  John 
D.  Gibbs  and  Julia  A.  Tompkins.  He 
was  baptized  June  15,  1868,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1895-1898, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  17, 
1899,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

GIBBS,  John  Robert,  Bishop  of  the 
Portage  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb. 
14,  1888,  in  Portage,  Utah,  a  son  of 
James  Hyrum  Gibbs  and  Sarah  Maria 
Green.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  14,  1896, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  21,  1928, 
by  George  Albert  Smith,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Jan.  12,  1929,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

HANSON,  Hyrum  James,  Bishop  of 
the  Malad  2nd  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930  +  ,  was  born 
March  28, 1876,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  James  Hanson  and  Matilda 
Bengston.     He  was  baptized  May  4, 

1884,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1900-1903, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  12,  1930,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

HARRIS,  Archibald,  Bishop  of  the 
Saint  John  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho, 
from   1918  to  1929,  was  born  Jan.  3, 

1885,  in  Woodruff,  Oneida  Co.,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  Everett  Harris  and  Margaret 
Johns.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  6,  1917,  and  ordained  Bish- 
op Aug.  18, 1918,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

HARRIS,  Enoch,  Bishop  of  the 
Portage  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1888  to  1899,  was  born  in  Nau- 
voo,  Hancock  Co.,  Illinois,  a  son  of 
Robert  Harris  and  Hannah  Maria 
Eagles.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  emigrated  to  Utah 
with  his  parents,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Feb.  12,  1888,  by  Lorenzo  Snow. 

HARRIS,  Joseph  Robert,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodruff  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Ida- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


521 


ho,  from  1891  to  1905,  was  born  April 
11,  1857,  in  Kaysville,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Joseph  Harris  and  Charlotte 
Green.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  16,  1889,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  16,  1891,  by  Lorenzo 
Snow. 

HUGHES,  David,  Bishop  of  the  Sa- 
maria Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho,  fi-om 
1914  to  1927,  was  born  March  24, 
1873,  in  Samaria,  Idaho,  a  son  of 
Gomer  Hughes  and  Jane  R.  Roberts. 
He  was  baptized  April  17,  1881,  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1899- 
1901,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  July 
31,  1909,  by  William  H.  Gibbs,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  July  26,  1914,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

IPSEN,  Nephi  Ruel,  Bishop  of  the 
Pleasant  View  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  26,  1893,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Nephi  P.  Ipsen  and  Margaret 
May  Wight.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  1, 
1901,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Central  States  in 
1914-1917,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  12,  1929,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

JENSON,  James  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Malad  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1908  to  1912,  and  Bishop  of  the 
Malad  First  Ward,  from  1912  to  1915, 
was  born  Oct.  12,  1875,  in  Newton, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jens  Peter 
and  Mary  Jenson.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  12,  1883,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  27,  1908,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

JONES,  Hyrum  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Pleasant  View  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1913  to  1929,  was  born 
Oct.  25,  1868,  at  Henderson  Creek, 
Oneida  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Lewis  W. 
Jones  and  Sarah  Williams.  He  was 
baptized    when    eight   years    old,    or- 


dained to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1899- 
1901,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept. 
27,  1908,  by  George  F.  Richards,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  23,  1913,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

JONES,  Jenkins,  Bishop  of  the  Ma- 
lad Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1890  to  1896,  was  born  July  17,  1840, 
in  Glamorganshire,  Wales,  a  son  of 
Thomas  Jones  and  Elizabeth  Jenkins. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  14,  1864,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1866,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  12,  1888,  by  Moses 
Thatcher,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
16,  1890,  by  Lorenzo  Snow.  He  died 
Jan.  6,  1919. 

JONES,  John  Davis,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Cherry  Creek  Branch,  Malad 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1873  to  1880,  and 
Bishop  of  the  Cherry  Creek  Ward  from 
1880  to  1885,  was  born  Nov.  2,  1831,  in 
South  Wales,  a  son  of  Benjamin  Davis 
Jones  and  Elizabeth  Evans.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  10,  1846,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1849,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  31,  1880,  by 
Lorenzo  Snow. 

JONES,  Joseph  Alonzo,  Bishop  of 
the  Cherry  Creek  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1903  to  1911,  was  born 
April  19,  1871,  in  Willard,  Utah,  a  son 
of  John  D.  Jones  and  Sarah  J.  James. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  22,  1902. 
by  William  H.  Gibbs,  and  when  the 
ward  was  reorganized  in  1903,  he  was 
made  Bishop. 

LUNDBERG,  Benjamin,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodruff  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1921  to  1930,  was  born  Nov. 
1,  1886,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  H.  Lundberg  and  Anna  Gusta- 
veson.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  1,  1894, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  19,  1921,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

McCRARY,  John  M.,  first  counselor 
in  the  Malad  Stake  presidency,  Idaho, 


522 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


from  1892  to  1902,  was  born  in  Cynthi- 
ana,  Posey  Co.,  Indiana,  a  son  of 
James  McCrary  and  Matilda  Forest. 
He  was  baptized  in  May,  1850,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  that  year,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Peter  Boise,  crossed 
the  plains  as  a  hand-cart  missionary 
to  Canada  in  1857,  and  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  June  13,  1892,  by 
John  W.  Taylor. 

PARKINSON,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Portage  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1918  to  1929,  was  born  Jan.  31, 

1867,  in  Wellsville,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Thomas  Parkinson  and  Eliza- 
beth King.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  16, 
1892,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northwestern  States 
in  1902-1904,  was  oi'dained  a  High 
Priest  March  24,  1907,  by  George  F. 
Richards,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
18,  1918,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

PETERSON,  Hyrum,  Bishop  of  the 
Samaria  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1913  to  1914,  was  born  Jan.  1, 

1868,  in  Bear  River  City,  Box  Elder 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Peterson  and 
Helena  Olsen.  He  was  baptized  when 
ten  years  old,  was  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Scandi- 
navia in  1909-1911,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  26,  1913, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

PRICE,  David  Evan,  Bishop  of  the 
Samaria  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1897  to  1912,  was  born  Nov.  17, 
1852,  in  Talgarth,  Brechnockshire, 
South  Wales,  a  son  of  John  Evan  Price 
and  Ruth  Williams.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  17,  1860,  emigrated  to  America 
in  1865,  was  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1895-1897,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  26,  1884,  by  William  D. 
Hendricks,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
13,  1897,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

RICHARDS,  Loren  Lovern,  Bishop 
of  the  Malad  2nd  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 


Idaho,  from  1928  to  1929,  was  born 
Jan.  2,  1899,  in  Malad,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  William  H.  Richards  and  Catherine 
A.  Jones.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  2, 
1907,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Central  States  in 
1917-1920,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  21,  1928,  by 
George  F.  Richards. 

RICHARDS,  Thomas  William,  pres- 
ident of  the  Malad  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  14, 
1884,  in  Malad,  Idaho,  a  son  of  William 
H.  Richards  and  Catherine  A.  Jones 
Davis.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1892, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  27,  1908, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  set  apart  as 
president  Oct.  21,  1928,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

RICHARDS,  William  Henry,  presi- 
dent of  the  Malad  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1908  to  1928,  was  born  Aug.  29,  1860, 
in  Brigham  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thom- 
as William  Richards  and  Charlotte 
Thomas.  He  was  baptized  Jan,  12, 
1869,  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  16, 
1890,  by  William  H.  Gibbs,  ordained 
Bishop  of  the  Malad  Ward  Jan.  19, 
1896,  by  George  Q.  Cannon,  and  was 
set  apart  as  president  Sept.  27,  1908, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

RODERICK,  John  P.,  Bishop  of  the 
Samaria  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1927  to  1930,  was  born  Dec.  11, 
1880,  in  Samaria,  Oneida  Co.,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  William  Roderick  and  Annie 
M.  Price.  He  was  baptized  in  1889 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
April  10,  1927,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

RUEGSEGGER,  Rudolph,  Bishop  of 
the  Daniels  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1920  to  1928,  was  born  April  20, 
1890,  in  Gumlingen,  Switzerland,  a  son 
of  Samuel  Ruegsegger  and  Anna  E. 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  May  8,  1901, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  20,  1920,  by  Rudger  Claw- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


523 


STONE,  David  Lehi,  Bishop  of  the 
West  Daniels  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1912  to  1920,  and  Bishop  of 
the  Daniels  Ward  from  1928  to  1930, 
was  born  Jan.  5,  1884,  in  Logan,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Enoch  Stone  and  Fanny  Bur- 
rows. He  was  baptized  March  23, 
1892,  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Nov.  24,  1912,  by  David  O.  McKay, 
and  was  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the 
Daniels  Ward  Jan.  12,  1929,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney. 

STUART,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Malad  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1880  to  1890,  was  born  Feb.  27,  1845, 
in  Stavely,  Lancashire,  England,  a  son 
of  Daniel  Stuart  and  Agnes  Huddlis- 
ton.  He  was  baptized  in  1853,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Ma- 
lad Ward  Oct.  31,  1880,  by  Oliver  G. 
Snow. 

WIGHT,  Stephen,  Bishop  of  the 
Pleasant  View  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1908  to  1913,  was  born 
April  1,  1854,  in  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Stephen  Wight  and 
Lucy  E.  Waterberg.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  13,  1897,  by  Wil- 
liam H.  Gibbs,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  27,  1908,  by  George  F.  Richards. 
He  died  in  1924. 

WILLIAMS,  James  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Samaria  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  29,  1893, 
in  Samaria,  Oneida  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  Jeremiah  Hodge  and  Ruth  Williams, 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  3,  1901,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
29,  1930,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

WILLIAMS,  Leo  Daniels,  Bishop  of 
the  Cherry  Creek  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  24,  1902,  in  Malad,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  John  S.  Williams  and  Annie  Eliza 
Daniels.  He  was  baptized  July  1,  1911, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 


op April  22,  1928,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards. 

WILLIAMS,  William  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  Samaria  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1912  to  1913,  was  born  April 
2,  1881,  in  Samaria,  Idaho,  a  son  of 
Jeremiah  Hodge  and  Ruth  Williams. 
He  was  baptized  in  1889,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  3, 
1912,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

WOODLAND,  Daniel  Peters,  first 
counselor  in  the  Malad  Stake  presi- 
dency, Idaho,  from  1898  to  1900,  also 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb. 
17,  1882,  in  Woodland,  Bannock  Co., 
Idaho,  a  son  of  William  W.  Woodland 
and  Laura  Peters.  He  was  baptized 
April  9,  1892,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  Japan  in  1905- 
1908,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
21.  1928,  by  George  F.  Richards,  and 
was  sustained  as  first  counselor  Oct. 
21,  1928. 

YEARSLEY,  Nathan  David,  Bishop 
of  the  Woodruff  Ward,  Malad  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1914  to  1921,  was  born 
Oct.  13,  1865,  in  Ogden,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Nathan  Yearsley  and 
Ruthinda  Stewart.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  March  19,  1899,  by  An- 
thon  H.  Lund  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  22,  1914,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

ZUNDEL,  Isaac  David,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodruff  Ward,  Malad  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1905  to  1914,  was  born  Sept. 
18,  1868,  in  Willard,  Box  Elder  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Isaac  E.  D.  Zundel  and 
Elizabeth  Jane  Harding.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  yeai's  old,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  9,  1902, 
by  Oliver  C.  Hoskins,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  25,  1905,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 


Maricopa  Stake 


BIRD,  Reaves  Alexander,  Bishop  of 
the   Papago    Ward,    Maricopa    Stake, 


524 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Arizona,  from  1912  to  1914,  was  born 
Oct.  13,  1880,  in  Vernal,  Uintah  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Bradford  K.  Bird.  He 
was  baptized  in  1889,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Dec.  8,  1912,  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

CLARK,  Leigh  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Mesa  3rd  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1925  to  1927,  was  born 
Oct.  21,  1900,  in  Lehi,  Maricopa  Co., 
Arizona,  a  son  of  Joseph  W.  Clark  and 
Mary   Noble.     He  was   baptized   Oct. 

21,  1908,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  England  in  1921- 
1923,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and,  Bishop  May  23,  1925,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

DANA,  Clarence,  Bishop  of  the 
Mesa  2nd  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1914  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  10,  1879,  in  Mesa,  Maricopa  Co., 
Arizona,  a  son  of  George  C.  Dana  and 
Amanda  A.  Phelps.  He  was  baptized 
in  1886,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1899-1901,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  8,  1912,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  9, 
1914,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

DANA,  Hugh,  Bishop  of  the  Mesa 
3rd  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug. 
16,  1875,  in  Montpelier,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  Charles  Carl  Dana  and  Hannah  El- 
len Oderkirk.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1898-1900,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  16,  1928,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

DANA,  Isaac,  Bishop  of  the  Mesa 
1st  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1912  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June 

22,  1866,  in  Montpelier,  Bear  Lake  Co., 
Idaho,  a  son  of  Charles  Carl  Dana  and 
Hannah  Ellen  Odekirk.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 


Southern  States  in  1893-1895,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  8,  1902, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept,  8,  1912, 
by  James  E.  Talmage. 

DAVIS,  Alma  Morgan,  Bishop  of 
the  Mesa  4th  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1927  to  1930 -f-,  was 
born  March  21,  1883,  in  Holladay, 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  G.  Davis  and 
Esther  Harrison.  He  was  baptized 
June  4,  1891,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  7,  1920,  by  Orle  S.  Stapley,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  14,  1927,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

DAVIS,  Hyrum  George,  Bishop  of 
the  Lehi  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1905  to  1908,  was  born 
March  17,  1875,  in  Big  Cottonwood, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William 
G.  Davis  and  Emily  Nix.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  3,  1883,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southwestern  States  in  1902-1903,  and 
was  sustained  as  Bishop  Nov.  28,  1905. 

GARDNER,  William  Clark,  Bishop 
of  the  Mesa  3rd  Ward,  Maricopa 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1927  to  1928,  was 
born  March  23,  1896,  in  Woodruff, 
Arizona,  a  son  of  Quince  R.  Gardner 
and  Mary  A.  Owens.  He  was  baptized 
June  5,  1904,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  23,  1925,  by  Orle  S.  Stapley,  and 
sustained  as  Bishop  Jan.  23,  1927. 

HAYMORE,  Arthur  Samuel,  Bishop 
of  the  Gilbert  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1918  to  1926,  was  born 
Feb.  1,  1878,  in  Payson,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Franklin  D.  Haymore 
and  Lucinda  A.  Taylor.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Mex- 
ico in  1910-1912,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  17,  1918, 
by  David  O.  McKay. 

HILL,  Lafayette,  Bishop  of  the 
Mesa  4th  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona,  from    1921    to    1927,   was   born 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


525 


March  6,  1876,  in  Toquerville,  Wash- 
ington Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  Hill 
and  Mary  J.  Price.  He  was  baptized 
in  1884,  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  4, 
1906,  by  George  Teasdale,  and  sustain- 
ed as  Bishop  Nov.  7,  1920. 

HUNSAKER,  Alexander,  Bishop  of 
the  Alma  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1891  to  1906,  was  born  May 
19,  1852,  at  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Abraham  Hunsaker  and  Har- 
riet V.  Beckstead.  He  was  baptized 
in  1862,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1875-1877,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  22,  1889,  by  Oliver  G.  Snow,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  27,  1891,  by 
John  Henry  Smith.  He  died  June  10, 
1910. 

HUNSAKER,  Edgar,  Bishop  of  the 
Alma  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1906  to  1920,  and  Bishop  of  the 
Mesa  3rd  Ward  of  said  stake,  from 
1920  to  1925,  was  born  Oct.  17,  1872,  in 
Honeyville,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Alexander  Hunsaker  and  M.  C. 
Johnson.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  16, 
1881,  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  14, 
1903,  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley,  and  set 
apart  as  Bishop  Nov.  7,  1920,  by  Rud- 
ger  Clawson. 

JONES,  John  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Lehi  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1919  to  1930 -h,  was  born  Feb.  2, 
1878,  in  Adamsville,  Beaver  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Thomas  E.  and  Lucretia 
Jones.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  2,  1886, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1906- 
1908,  and  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
Aug.  2,  1919. 

JONES,  Thomas  Evan,  Bishop  of 
the  Lehi  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1882  to  1895,  was  born  July 
30,  1844,  in  South  Wales,  Great  Bri- 
tain, a  son  of  David  Jones  and  Eleanor 
Evan.    He  was  baptized  in  May  1863, 


and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Dec.  10,  1882,  by  Erastus  Snow. 

KEMPTON,  Albert  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Gilbert  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,. 
Arizona,  from  1926  to  1928,  was  born 
Sept.  21,  1876,  in  Brigham  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Ira  T.  Kempton  and  Elvina  M. 
Olson.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  5,  1886, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1898- 
1900,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
8,  1926,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  7, 
1926,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

LAMOREAUX,  Guy  V.,  Bishop  of 
the  Chandler  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  July  6,  1887,  in  Preston,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  Archibald  Orrell  Lamoreaux 
and  Lydia  L.  Crockett.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  20,  1895,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1911-1913,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  in  November, 
1914,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Sept.  16,  1928,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

LE  BARON,  William  Johnson,  first 
counselor  in  the  Maricopa  Stake  presi- 
dency from  1902  to  1905,  was  born 
Feb.  6,  1856,  in  Payson,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  David  Tulley  Le  Baron 
and  Esther  Malita  Johnson.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Sept.  27,  1891,  and 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  Dec.  4, 
1902. 

LESUEUR,  James  Warren,  presi- 
dent of  the  Maricopa  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1912  to  1926,  was  born  May  31, 
1878,  at  Montpelier,  Bear  Lake  Co., 
Idaho,  a  son  of  John  Taylor  Lesueur 
and  Geneva  Casto.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  7,  1886,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1898-1900,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  28,  1903,  by  J.  T.  Lesueur, 
and  set  apart  as  president  March  9, 
1912,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 


526 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


NICHOLS,  Alfred  Hyrum,  Bishop  of 
the  Gilbert  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  March  7,  1897,  in  Oaxaca,  Mex- 
ico, a  son  of  E.  S.  Nichols  and  Viola 
V.  Scott.  He  was  baptized  April  2, 
1905,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  19, 
1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

OPENSHAW,  Samuel,  Bishop  of 
the  Nephi  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1888  to  1900,  was  born  in 
Brightmet,  Lancashire,  England,  a  son 
of  William  Openshaw  and  Ann  Green- 
halgh.  He  was  baptized  April  24, 
1847,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  28, 
1876,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  23, 
1888,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

PETERSON,  Henry  Lewis,  Bishop 
of  the  Chandler  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1913  to  1928,  was  born 
Aug.  5,  1878,  in  Coalville,  Summit  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  Peterson  and 
Clara  Jane  Lewis.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  2,  1886,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1907-1908,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  6,  1913, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

PRICE,  George  Finity,  Bishop  of 
the  Phoenix  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1926  to  1928,  and  Bish- 
op of  the  Phoenix  2nd  Ward  from  1928 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June  28,  1886, 
in  Charleston,  Utah,  a  son  of  Geoi-ge 
Price  and  Mary  H.  Daybell.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  1,  1894,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1899-1901,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  9,  1926,  by  David  O. 
McKay,  and  sustained  as  Bishop  in 
the  same  year. 

PRICE,  James  Robert,  president  of 
the  Maricopa  Stake,  Arizona,  from 
1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  April  3,  1885, 
in  Charleston,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  George  Price  and  Mary  Hannah 
Daybell.     He  was  baptized   Sept.   15, 


1893,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1905- 
1907,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
22,  1914,  by  J.  W.  Lesueur,  and  set 
apart  as  president  in  November,  1926, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

RIGGS,  John  Lyle,  Bishop  of  the 
Mesa  2nd  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona,, from  1912  to  1914,  was  born  Nov. 
25,  1879,  in  Shunesburg,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  T.  Riggs  and  Clarice  M. 
Millett.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  8,  1912,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

ROGERS,  Henry  Clay,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Maricopa  Stake  presi- 
dency, Arizona,  from  1882  to  1902,  was 
born  Oct.  19,  1833,  in  New  York  City, 
N.  Y.,  a  son  of  David  White  Rogers 
and  Martha  Collins.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1842,  came  to  Salt  Lake  City 
in  1852,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
1878,  and  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
in  1882  by  John  Henry  Smith.  He  died 
March  8,  1902. 

ROGERS,  Isaac  Higbee,  Bishop  of 
the  Lehi  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1914  to  1919,  was  born  Nov. 
27,  1875,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Henry  C.  Rogers  and  Emma  Higbee. 
He  was  baptized  Dec.  6,  1883,  and 
sustained  as  Bishop  Nov,  22,  1914. 

SKILL,  Wright  Paynter,  Bishop  of 
the  Lehi  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, fi'om  1908  to  1914,  was  born  Jan. 
12,  1880,  in  Croyden,  Morgan  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  G.  Shill  and 
Harriett  Paynter.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  23,  1908, 
by  John  Henry  Smith. 

SORENSON,  Soren  Christian,  Bish- 
op of  the  Lehi  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1895  to  1905,  was  born 
Feb.  16,  1859,  at  Hadsund,  Aalborg 
amt,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Mads  Soren- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


527 


son  and  Kirsten  Christensen.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  25,  1895,  by  Brigham  Young,  jun. 
He  died  July  7,  1933. 

TIFFANY,  Asa  York,  Bishop  of  the 
Papago  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1915  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  24,  1881,  at  Provo,  Utah,  a  son 
of  George  M.  Tiffany  and  Sarah  Jane 
York.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  24,  1889, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  New  Zealand  in  1901-1905, 
and  was  ox'dained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  22,  1915,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant, 

TIFFANY,  George  Mason,  Bishop 
of  the  Papago  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1891  to  1906,  was  born 
Jan.  31,  1850,  in  Pottawattamie  Co., 
Iowa,  a  son  of  George  Tiffany  and 
Almyra  Whipple.  He  was  baptized  in 
1858,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  19, 
1885,  by  Charles  I.  Robson,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Sept.  27,  1891,  by 
John  Henry  Smith, 

TURLEY,  Marion  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Tempe  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1907  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Aug.  15,  1888,  in  Colonia  Juarez, 
Mexico,  a  son  of  William  Henry  Tur- 
ley  and  Mary  Skousen.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb. 
19,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

UDALL,  John  Hunt,  Bishop  of  the 
Phoenix  1st  Ward,  Maricopa  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Aug.  23,  1889,  in  Snowflake,  Ari- 
zona, a  son  of  David  K.  Udall  and  Ida 
F.  Hunt.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  4, 
1897,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Feb.  20,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 


Millard  Stake 


ALLEN,  Jonathan  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
McCornick  Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah, 


from  1923  to  1927,  was  born  Nov.  3, 
1883,  at  Pine  Creek,  Gila  Co.,  Arizona, 
a  son  of  Jonathan  A.  Allen  and  Jane 
Nelson.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  29, 
1891,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
15,  1914,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  11,  1923,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

BENNETT,  Hiram  Bell,  Bishop  of 
the  Meadow  Ward,  Millard  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1901,  was  born 
March  1,  1823,  in  Sumner  County, 
Tennessee,  a  son  of  William  Bennett 
and  Elizabeth  Bell.  He  was  baptized 
about  1841,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1852, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  July  22, 
1877,  by  Erastus  Snow. 

BENNETT,  Jesse  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Meadow  Ward,  Millard  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1927,  was  born 
July  25,  1869,  in  Meadow,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Hiram  B.  Bennett  and  Ellen  Green- 
halgh.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  15, 1877, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Samoa  in  1889-1892,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  11,  1912,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

BROWN,  Arthur  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Scipio  Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1926  to  1928,  was  born  July  27, 
1899,  at  Scipio,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jorgen 
P.  Brown  and  Anne  Peterson.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  24,  1907,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Cen- 
tral States  in  1919-1922,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  8,  1925,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

BUSHNELL,  Daniel  Dearden,  Bish- 
op of  the  Meadow  Ward,  Millard  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1928,  was  born  Dec. 
18,  1892,  in  Meadow,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Daniel  B.  Bushnell  and  Susan  Dearden. 
He  was  baptized  June  8,  1901,  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1915- 
1918,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  11,  1927,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 


528 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


CALLISTER,  Thomas  Clark,  Bishop 
of  the  Fillmore  Ward,  Millard  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1885  to  1901,  was  born 
Aug.  2,  1852,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Thomas  Callister  and  Helen 
Mar  Clark.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  27,  1881,  by  Ira  N.  Hinck- 
ley, and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  22, 
1885,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

CHRISTENSEN,  Christian  Frank- 
lin, Bishop  of  the  Kanosh  Ward,  Mil- 
lard Stake,  Utah,  from  1897  to  1908, 
was  born  Aug.  26,  1864,  in  Panguitch, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Hans  Christensen  and 
Magdalene  Christensen.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1872,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1882-1885,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  21, 1889,  by  Abraham 
H.  Cannon,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Aug.  21,  1897,  by  George  Teasdale. 

DAY,  Rufus,  Bishop  of  the  Fillmore 
Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah,  from  1917 
to  1920,  was  born  Aug.  10,  1869,  in 
Didmartin,  England,  a  son  of  John  Day 
and  Mary  Clark.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  5,  1880,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1895-1898,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Feb.  9,  1917,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

GEORGE,  Preal,  Bishop  of  the  Ka- 
nosh Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  25, 
1897,  in  Kanosh,  Millard  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Alonzo  George  and  Clara  Edith 
Barney.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  2, 
1905,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1917-1919,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  30,  1925,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

GLEDHILL,  Fred  Ovie,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  McCornick  Ward,  Millard 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1923,  was 
born  Aug.  28,  1892,  in  Vermillion,  Se- 
vier Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  Gled- 


hill  and  Lilly  Belle  Ivie.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  12,  1900,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1914-1916,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  13,  1922,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

HATCH,  William  Ira,  Bishop  of  the 
Scipio  Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1918  to  1919,  was  born  March  10, 
1857,  in  Carson,  Nevada,  a  son  of  Orin 
and  Maria  T.  Hatch.  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  May  12,  1918,  by  David  0. 
McKay  and  died  Jan.  21,  1919. 

HOPKINSON,  Jesse,  Bishop  of  the 
Kanosh  Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1889  to  1897,  was  born  Sept.  17, 
1848,  in  Berry,  Lancashire,  England, 
a  son  of  Thomas  Hopkinson  and  Nancy 
Nuttall.  He  was  baptized  July  7,  1873, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1886,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  26,  1889,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

JEFFERIES,  Murray,  Bishop  of  the 
McCornick  Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1927  to  1930,  was  bom  June  23, 
1881,  in  Grantsville,  Tooele  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Jefferies  and  Mary 
Francis  Ould.  He  was  baptized  June 
23,  1889,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1908-1910,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  27,  1927, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

JENSON,  Lars,  Bishop  of  the  Scipio 
Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah,  in  1929, 
was  born  June  15,  1873,  in  Norhede, 
Denmark,  a  son  of  Jens  C.  Skjelsgaard 
and  Anna  Christine  Pleidrup.  He  was 
baptized  April  14,  1902,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Oct.  30,  1908,  by  Anthony 
W.  Ivins,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Dec.  2,  1928,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

RAPPLEYE,  Ammon  Tunis,  Bishop 
of  the  Kanosh  Ward,  Millard  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1922  to  1925,  was  born 
Sept.  23,  1873,  in  Kanosh,  Millard  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Ammon  L.  Rappleye 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


529 


and  Sophie  Larsen.  He  was  baptized 
March  23,  1892,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Society 
Islands  in  1897-1900,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  13, 
1922,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

ROBINS,  James  Wells,  Bishop  of 
Scipio  Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug. 
22,  1888,  in  Scipio,  Millard  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Robins  and  Delcina 
Thompson.  He  was  baptized  July  16, 
1898,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and 
filled  a  mission  in  the  Southern  States 
in  1911-1913,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  8,  1925,  by  John  A. 
Beckstrand,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Dec.  1,  1929,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

ROBISON,  Joseph  V.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Millard  Stake  presidency, 
from  1877  to  1890,  was  born  Dec.  30, 
1832,  in  Clay,  Onondago  Co.,  N.'  Y.,  a 
son  of  Joseph  Robison  and  Lucretia 
Hancock.  He  was  baptized  in  1848, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1871- 
1873,  and  was  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  July  22,  1877,  by  Wilford 
Woodruff. 

ROBISON,  Parker  Pratt,  Bishop  of 
the  Fillmore  1st  Ward,  Millard  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1928,  was  born 
April  9,  1893,  in  Fillmore,  Millard  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Franklin  A.  Robison 
and  Isabella  Eleanor  Pratt.  He  was 
baptized  July  6,  1901,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  14,  1920, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

STOTT,  Joseph  Leo,  Bishop  of  the 
Meadow  Ward,  Millard  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct. 
28,  1894,  in  Provo,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Joseph  Lee  Stott  and  Sarah 
Ellen  Bennett.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
5,  1903,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
30,  1925,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Dec.  2,  1928,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney. 


THOMPSON,  Daniel,  first  counselor 
in  the  Millard  Stake  presidency,  Utah, 
from  1882  to  1902,  was  born  Dec.  25, 
1824,  in  Canada,  a  son  of  William 
Thompson  and  Elizabeth  Macaulay. 
He  was  baptized  about  1849,  came  to 
Utah  in  1851,  was  ordained  Bishop 
of  the  Scipio  Ward  March  9,  1869,  by 
George  A.  Smith,  and  chosen  as  first 
counselor  May  28,  1882. 


Minidoka  Stake 


ANDERSON,  John  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Acequia  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1918  to  1920,  was  born  May  15, 
1873,  in  Meadow,  Millard  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Haakon  Anderson  and  Mary 
A.  Nielsen.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  5,  1918,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

ASTLE,  Richard  Thomas,  Bishop  of 

the  Rupert  2nd  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1920  to  1924,  was  born 
Sept.  2,  1871,  in  Montpelier,  Idaho,  a 
son  of  John  Astle  and  Isabel  Brad- 
shaw.  He  was  baptized  July  18,  1880, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northwestern  States  in 
1911-1913,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  3,  1906,  by  Aroet  L.  Hale,  and 
sustained  as  Bishop  June  27,  1920. 

BARNES,  Herschel,  president  of  the 
Jackson  Branch,  Minidoka  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  20,  1894,  a  son  of  Lorenzo  D. 
Barnes  and  Algina  Cable.  He  was 
baptized  July  15,  1904,  and  sustained 
as  presiding  Elder  April  29,  1928. 

BORUP,  David  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Rupert  1st  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1919  to  1930,  was  born 
Dec.  5,  1881,  in  Goshen,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Christen  Carl  Borup  and  Caroline 
Thomas.  He  was  baptized  in  June, 
1895,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  16,  1919,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 


Vol.  IV,  No.  34 


Aug.  22,  1936 


530 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


BREWERTON,    Charles    Albert, 

Bishop  of  the  Acequia  Ward,  Mini- 
doka Stake,  Idaho,  from  1922  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  24,  1883,  in 
Elba,  Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Char- 
les Albert  Brewerton  and  Sarah  H. 
Hardy.  He  was  baptized  in  May,  1891, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  mis- 
sions to  the  Society  Islands  in  1899- 
1901  and  in  1903-1906.  He  acted  as 
presiding  Elder  of  the  Jackson 
Branch,  Idaho,  from  the  time  of  its 
organization  in  1899  until  1917,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  19,  1922,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

BUTLER,  John  Lowe,  Bishop  of  the 
Acequia  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1920  to  1922,  was  born  June  5, 
1874,  in  Panguitch,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
L.  Butler  and  Nancy  F.  Smith.  He 
was  baptized  June  25,  1882,  and  was 
sustained  as  Bishop  Aug.  22,  1920. 

FAILS,  Herman  Peter,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Minidoka  Stake  presi- 
dency, Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930,  was 
born  May  9,  1883,  in  Wood  County, 
Ohio,  a  son  of  Henry  R.  Fails  and 
Martha  Jane  Rechner.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  8,  1902,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1902,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  3,  1913,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and 
was  set  apai't  as  second  counselor  May 
11,  1924,  by  Richard  C.  May. 

GREEN,  George  Davis,  Bishop  of 
the  Paul  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  17, 
1892,  in  Kanesville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
George  Green  and  Charlotte  I.  Bar- 
tholomew. He  was  baptized  July  6, 
1901,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1919-1920,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  22,  1921,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

HAMMON,  Frank  Leslie,  Bishop  of 
the  Rupert  2nd  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  21,  1893,  in  South  Hooper,  Davis 


Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Levi  Byrum  Ham- 
mon  and  Martha  Jane  Belna.  He  was 
baptized  June  6,  1902,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia in  1912-1914,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  9,  1915,  by  Lewis  W. 
Shurtliff,  and  sustained  as  Bishop 
April  13,  1924. 

JOHNSON,  Peter.  Bishop  of  the 
Paul  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1915  to  1917,  was  born  Jan.  28, 
1876,  at  Mineral  Point,  lona  Co.,  Wis- 
consin, a  son  of  Ole  C.  Johnson  and 
Nellie  M.  Larson.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  5,  1886,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  1914,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  Sept.  26,  1915. 

MAY,  Richard  C,  president  of  the 
Minidoka  Stake,  Idaho,  from  10''  +o 
1930 +  ,  was  born  June  2(,  1876,  in 
Calls  Fort,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  James  May  and  Martha  Allen.  He 
was  baptized  in  Sept.,  1898,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  10,  1910,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  and  set  apart  as  stake 
president  May  11,  1924,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

MENDENHALL,  James  M.,  Bishop 

of  the  Hazelton  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1926  to  1928,  was  born 
Aug.  16,  1883,  in  Dayton,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  George  Madison  Mendenhall  and 
Celestia  Mecham.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  16,  1891,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, and  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1904  (receiving  an  early 
release  on  account  of  sickness),  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  3,  1916, 
by  James  E.  Talmage,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  6,  1926,  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

OLSEN,  Jesse  Jensen,  Bishop  of  the 
Hazelton  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  13,  1883,  in  Paradise,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Gideon  E.  Olsen  and 
Caroline  Jensen.  He  was  baptized 
May  6,  1891,  ordained  a  High  Priest 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


531 


in  1921  by  Joseph  P.  Payne,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  March  16,  1930,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

SHORT,  Ira  Temple,  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Emerson  Branch,  Minidoka 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1921  to  1926,  and 
Bishop  of  the  Emerson  Ward  from 
1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  July  6,  1891, 
in  Farr  West,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Temple  Short  and  Margaret  Fisher. 
He  was  baptized  about  1907,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  April  11,  1926,  by  Rich- 
ard C.  May,  and  was  sustained  as 
Bishop  on  the  same  day. 

SMITH,  Charles,  jun..  Bishop  of  the 
Heyburn  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec. 
24,  1883,  in  Centerville,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  L.  Smith  and 
Pamelia  E.  Thompson.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  28,  1892,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  15,  1919, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

SMITH,  Charles  Leo,  Bishop  of  the 
Hazelton  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1928  to  1929,  was  born  April 
29,  1892,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  a  son  of 
George  A.  Smith  and  Eleanor  R.  Mor- 
ris. He  was  baptized  Aug.  2,  1900, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  June  17,  1928, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

WAYMENT,  Alma  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Paul  Ward,  Minidoka  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1917  to  1921,  was  born  May  13, 
1879,  in  Plain  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Samuel  Wayment  and  Castina  Chap- 
man. He  was  baptized  May  26,  1887, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1902-1904, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  3, 
1915,  by  James  E.  Talmage,  and  was 
sustained  as  Bishop  in  1917. 


Moapa  Stake 


BOWMAN,   Elmer   Squires,   Bishop 
of  the  Logandale  Ward,  Moapa  Stake, 


Nevada,  from  1925  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
March  26,  1893,  in  Minersville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  C.  Bowman  and 
Lydia  Lorretta  Squires.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  15,  1901,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand  in  1913-1914,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  5,  1921,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
March  7,  1925,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

BUNKER,  Edward,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Bunkerville  Ward,  Moapa  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1883  to  1908,  was  born 
Feb.  1,  1847,  in  Garden  Grove,  Iowa, 
a  son  of  Edward  Bunker  and  Emily 
Abbott.  He  was  baptized  in  November, 
1856,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  11, 
1879,  by  John  D.  T.  McAllister,  who 
also  set  him  apart  as  Bishop  May  2, 
1883. 

BUNKER,  Bryan  Lamond,  Bishop 
of  the  Las  Vegas  Ward,  Moapa  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  8,  1898,  in  Bunkerville,  Lin- 
coln Co.,  Nevada,  a  son  of  Martin 
Allen  Bunker  and  Helen  Euphemia 
McNeil.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  8, 
1906,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1919-1921,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  2,  1929,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

BUNKER,  John  Mathieson,  Bishop 
of  the  Overton  Ward,  Moapa  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1901-1908,  was  born 
Sept,  12,  1870,  in  Santa  Clara,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Edward  Bunker  and  Mary 
McQuarrie.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  24,  1901,  by 
Abraham  0.  Woodruff. 

FREHNER,  Henry,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Littlefield  Branch,  Moapa  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1900  to  1916,  was  born 
Sept.  14,  1857,  in  Heisen,  Switzerland, 
a  son  of  Johann  J.  Frehner  and  Anna 
Elizabeth  Loch.  He  was  baptized  Dec. 
18,  1871,  and  died  July  26,  1925. 


532 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


> 


FREHNER,  Joseph,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Littlefield  Branch,  Moapa  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1916  to  1921,  was  born 
May  18,  1886,  in  Littlefield,  Arizona,  a 
son  of  Henry  Fi-ehner  and  Henrietta 
Reber.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  13,  1894, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  in  the  Central  States  in  1912- 
1914,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  2,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

GIBSON,  Robert  Orson,  Bishop  of 
the  St.  Thomas  Ward,  Moapa  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1912  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  19,  1880,  in  Duncan,  Kane  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Moses  W.  Gibson  and 
Lydia  Ann  Badger.  He  was  baptized 
Dec.  30,  1888,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
western States  in  1900-1903,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  9,  1912,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

MINEER,  Frank  Edgar,  second 
counselor  in  the  Moapa  Stake  presi- 
dency, Nevada,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Dec.  6,  1897,  in  St.  Johns, 
Arizona,  a  son  of  Emil  August  Mineer 
and  Frances  A.  White.  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  3,  1906,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  in  the 
Northern  States  in  1917-1920,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Pfiest  June  3,  1927,  by 
David  O.  McKay,  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  Sept.  4,  1929,  by  Mel- 
vin J.  Ballard. 

PERKINS,  William  Wallace,  Bishop 
of  the  Overton  Ward,  Moapa  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1915  to  1916,  was  born 
June  23,  1879,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  A.  Perkins  and  Rachel 
Lamb.  He  was  baptized  in  February 
1887,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southwestern  States 
in  1900-1903,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  9,  1912,  by  George  F.  Rich- 
ards, and  sustained  as  Bishop  of  Over- 
ton  Feb.  21,   1915. 

PULSIPHER,  Howard,  Bishop  of 
the  Mesquite  Ward,  Moapa  Stake,  Ne- 


vada, from  1929  to  1930 -f,  was  born 
Jan.  30,  1894,  in  Hebron,  Utah,  a  son 
of  John  David  Pulsipher  and  Ann 
Elizabeth  Bowles.  He  was  baptized 
May  4,  1902,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  3,  1927,  by  Willard  L.  Jones,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  June  2,  1929,  by  Or- 
son F.  Whitney. 

REBER,  Harold  Joseph,  Bishop  of 
the  Littlefield  Ward,  Moapa  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Feb.  24,  1895,  in  Santa  Clara, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Henry  Reber  and  Amelia  Anna  Enz. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  5,  1903,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northwestern  States  in  1920-1922, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Feb.  27,  1927,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

REBER,  Joseph  Hyrum,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Littlefield  Branch,  Moapa 
Stake,  Nevada,  from  1921  to  1926,  was 
born  Aug.  12,  1873,  in  Santa  Clara, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Samuel  Reber  and  Net- 
tie Winch.  He  was  baptized  May  4, 
1882,  sustained  as  presiding  Elder 
May  22,  1921,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  27,  1926,  by  Willard  L. 
Jones. 

ROBISON,  Joseph  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Ovei'ton  Ward,  Moapa  Stake,  Nevada, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  bom  July 
11,  1892,  in  Fillmore,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Joseph  Hancock  Robison  and  Nellie 
Hinckley.  He  was  baptized  July  29, 
1906,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  2,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

WHITNEY,  George  Luke,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Moapa  Stake  presidency, 
Nevada,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Aug.  3,  1874,  in  Panaca,  Lincoln 
Co.,  Nevada,  a  son  of  George  Burton 
Whitney  and  Lovina  Syphus.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  3,  1882,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  18,  1908,  by  George  Al- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


533 


bert    Smith,    and    set    apart    as    first 
counselor  Sept.  1,  1929. 

WITTWER,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Bunkerville  Ward,  Moapa  Stake,  Ne- 
vada, from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  12,  1892,  in  Bunkerville,  Nevada, 
a  son  of  Samuel  Wittwer  and  Bertha 
B.  Tobler.  He  was  baptized  March  10, 
1900,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  7,  1919,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 


Montpelier   Stake 

BEE,  John  Moxie,  Bishop  of  the 
Georgetown  Ward,  Montpelier  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1922  to  1928,  was  born 
July  29,  1872,  in  Woodruff,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Richard  J.  M.  Bee  and  Georgi- 
ana  McKechine.  He  was  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1906-1907,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  29,  1916, 
by  William  L.  Rich,  and  later  ordained 
a  Bishop.    He  died  May  21,  1928. 

BURGOYNE,  Sidney  Eynon,  Bishop 
of  the  Montpelier  3rd  Ward,  Mont- 
pelier Stake,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1930, 
was  born  Sept.  25,  1888,  in  Montpelier, 
a  son  of  Edward  L.  Burgoyne  and 
Binnie  Cederlund.  He  was  baptized  in 
October,  1896,  and  having  been  or- 
dained an  Elder  in  1908,  he  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Central  States  in  1912- 
1914.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  20,  1914,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and 
a  Bishop  March  11,  1923,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richai'ds. 

CLARK,  Walter  Edward,  Bishop  of 
the  Georgetown  Ward,  Montpelier 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1928  to  1929,  was 
born  May  31,  1889,  in  Farmington, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Edward  B.  Clark  and 
Alice  Randall.  He  was  baptized  July 
31,  1897,  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Char- 
les H.  Hart  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1913-1916.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  3,  1919, 


by  Silas  L.  Wright,  and  a  Bishop  Dec. 
16,  1928,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

CROCKETT,  William  Joseph,  Bish- 
op of  the  Montpelier  2nd  Ward,  Mont- 
pelier Stake,  Idaho,  from  1917  to  1922, 
was  born  Feb.  10,  1868,  in  Logan, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Alvin  Crockett  and 
Mary  S.  Reed.  He  was  baptized  May 
4,  1876,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1911-1913,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  3,  1914,  by  John  U. 
Stucki,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  23,  1917, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

DALRYMPLE,    Henry    Harrison, 

Bishop  of  the  Preston  Ward  (now 
Wardboro),  Montpelier  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1877  to  1889,  was  born  Nov.  24, 
1824,  in  Bolton,  Warren  Co.,  New 
York,  a  son  of  Henry  Harrison  and 
Maria  C.  Dalrymple.  He  came  to  Utah 
in  1859,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  in 
August,  1877. 

EVANS,  Frederick  Charles,  Bishop 
of  the  Raymond  Ward,  Montpelier 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1930 -f, 
was  born  Sept.  21,  1872,  in  Kaysville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Frederick  Henry  Evans 
and  Emma  Raymond.  He  was  baptiz- 
ed Sept.  13,  1885,  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  23,  1900,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1900-1902,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  9,  1904,  by  Wm.  L.  Rich,  and 
a  Bishop  Sept.  19,  1915,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

HIRSCHI,  Arnold  D.,  Bishop  of  the 
Geneva  Ward,  Montpelier  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1900  to  1915,  was  born  Dec. 
22,  1868,  in  Bern,  Switzerland,  a  son 
of  Jacob  Hirschi.  He  was  baptized 
April  11,  1878,  by  Theodore  Brandley, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

HOFF,  Henry  Herman,  jun..  Bish- 
op of  the  Montpelier  2nd  Ward,  Mont- 
pelier Stake,  Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930, 
was  born  Nov.  25,  1879,  at  Evanston, 


534 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Wyoming,  a  son  of  Henry  H.  Hoff  and 
Harriet  Bacon.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
1,  1888,  ordained  a  Seventy  April  16, 
1901,  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Germany  in  1901-1904,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  23,  1917,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  18, 
1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

HUMPHERYS,  Samuel,  Bishop  of 
the  Dingle  Ward,  Montpelier  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1886  to  1914,  was  born 
Jan.  31,  1846,  in  Mansfield,  Notting- 
hamshire, England,  the  son  of  Thomas 
Humphreys  and  Mary  Sudberry.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1853,  was  bap- 
tized in  1857,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Dec.  27,  1886,  by  Wm.  Budge. 

JONES,  John  W.,  Bishop  of  the 
Montpelier  4th  Ward,  Montpelier 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1929,  was 
born  Sept.  8,  1890,  in  Minersville, 
Utah,  the  son  of  John  F.  Jones  and 
Altheda  Ennes.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  2,  1921,  by  Edward 
C,  Rich,  and  a  Bishop  March  11,  1923, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

KEETCH,  Charles  G.,  Bishop  of  the 
Wardboro  Ward,  Montpelier  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1891  to  1909,  was  born 
Sept.  12,  1861,  in  Echo  Canyon,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Charles  G.  Keetch  and 
Mercy  Barker.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
3,  1873,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  11,  1891,  by 
Franklin  D.  Richards. 

KUNZ,  David  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Montpelier  2nd  Ward,  Montpelier 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1927,  was 
born  Dec.  5,  1881,  in  Nounan,  Idaho, 
the  son  of  Christian  Kunz  and  Caro- 
line Buhler.  He  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op March  10,  1923,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards. 

KUNZ,  John,  sen.,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Bern  Ward,  Montpelier  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1878  to  1890,  was  born 
Jan.  2,  1823,  in  Bern,  Switzerland,  the 


son  of  Johann  Kunz  and  Rosine  Cath- 
erine Klossner.  He  came  to  Utah  in 
1870  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
3,  1878,  by  Charles  C.  Rich.  He  died 
Feb.  16,  1890. 

KUNZ,  John,  jun.,  Bishop  of  the 
Bern  Ward,  Montpelier  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1890  to  1915,  was  born  Feb.  7, 
1844,  in  Diemtigen,  Canton  Bern, 
Switzerland,  the  son  of  Johann  Kunz 
and  Rosina  Knutti.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  15,  1868,  came  to  Idaho  in  1873, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Switzerland  and 
Germany  in  1884-1886.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  15,  1890, 
by  Wm.  Budge,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  10, 
1890,  by  John  W.  Taylor.  He  died  Jan. 
16,  1918. 

LARSEN,  Niels  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Raymond  (Thomas  Fork)  Ward, 
Montpelier  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1893  to 
1900,  was  born  Feb.  7,  1854,  in  Vester, 
Hassing,  Aalborg  amt,  Denmark.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  an  early  day  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Moses 
Thatcher. 

LEWIS,  Henry  Arundel,  Bishop  of 
the  Georgetown  Ward,  Montpelier 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1877  to  1900,  was 
born  June  26,  1838,  in  Hull,  York- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  Henry 
Lewis  and  Jane  Arundel.  He  was 
baptized  when  eleven  years  old  in 
England,  emigrated  to  America  in 
1850,  and  located  in  Idaho  in  1871;  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  26,  1877. 

RICHARDS,  Wilford   Woodruff, 

Bishop  of  the  Georgetown  Ward, 
Montpelier  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1901  to 
1906,  was  born  May  8,  1866,  in  Farm- 
ington,  Utah,  the  son  of  Franklin  D. 
Richards  and  Mary  Thompson.  He 
was  baptized  July  25,  1875,  filled  a 
mission  to  Virginia  in  1891-1893,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op June  23,  1901,  by  Geo.  Teasdale.  He 
died  Sept.  6,  1912,  in  Paris,  Idaho. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


535 


SIRRINE,  James  AVarren,  Bishop 
of  the  Dingle  Ward,  Montpelier  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1919  to  1929,  was  born 
Aug.  24,  1888,  in  Dingle,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Geo.  Edward  Sirrine  and  Sarah 
Oakey.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  England 
in  1909-1911,  and  acted  as  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Cokeville  Branch,  Wyo- 
ming, in  1912-1913.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  14, 
1919,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

TIPPETTS,   Harrison    P  1  u  m  m  e  r. 

Bishop  of  the  Georgetown  Ward, 
Montpelier  Stake,  from  1917  to  1922, 
was  born  Oct.  16,  1868,  in  Brigham 
City,  Utah,  the  son  of  Joseph  Tippetts 
and  Margaret  Madson.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  8,  1877,  ordained  an  Elder 
in  1889  by  Amos  Wright,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1908-1910,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  23,  1917,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

WILCOX,  Samuel  Allen,  Bishop  of 
the  Dingle  Ward,  Montpelier  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1882  to  1886,  was  born 
March  9,  1850,  in  Fremont  Co.,  Iowa, 
the  son  of  Samuel  A.  Wilcox  and  Mar- 
tha Parker.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1861, 
settled  in  Bear  Lake  Valley  in  1875 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  11,  1882,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.     He  died  Oct.  29,  1908. 

WRIGHT,  Amos  Russell,  Bishop  of 
the  Bennington  Ward,  Montpelier 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1881  to  1911,  was 
born  Jan.  11,  1840,  at  Exeter,  Scott 
Co.,  111.,  the  son  of  Jonathan  E.  Wright 
and  Rebecca  Wheeler.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  came  to 
Utah  in  1850  and  to  Idaho  in  1864,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  6,  1881, 
by  Pres.  John  Taylor.  He  died  Feb. 
24,  1915,  in  Bennington,  Idaho. 

WRIGHT,  Silas  Lloyd,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Montpelier  Stake  presi- 
dency, Idaho,  from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was 


born  March  16,  1884,  in  Bennington, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  Silas  Wright  and 
Ida  Ellen  Oakey.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  14,  1892,  and  after  being  or- 
dained an  Elder  filled  a  mission  to 
California  in  1906-1908.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  in 
March,  1911,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun., 
and  presided  over  the  Bennington 
Ward  from  1911  to  1919  or  until  he 
was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  in 
the  Montpelier  Stake  presidency. 


Moroni  Stake 


BAGNALL,  Joseph  Frobisher,  Bish- 
op of  the  Chester  Ward,  Moroni  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  9.) 

BRADLEY,     George     Washington, 

Bishop  of  the  Moroni  Ward,  Moroni 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1859  to  1868,  was 
born  Jan.  15,  1813,  in  Salem,  Washing- 
ton Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  James  P. 
Bradley  and  Albeah  Richmond.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  July  14,  1859, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith  and  died  March 
8,  1891. 

CROWTHER,  Osmond,  Bishop  of 
the  Fountain  Green  Ward,  Moroni 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930,  was 
born  Aug.  13,  1898,  in  Sanford,  Cone- 
jos Co.,  Colorado,  a  son  of  James  F. 
Crowther  and  Mary  Olsen.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  2,  1906,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1919-1920,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  16,  1929,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

IRONS,  Elmo  LeRoy,  Bishop  of  the 
Moroni  East  Ward,  Moroni  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  15,  1886,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Will  L.  Irons  and  Jane  Jolly.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  18,  1896,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  in  1919-1921,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  12,  1922, 


536 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


by  James  W.  Anderson,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  April  8,  1928,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

JACOBSEN,  Soren  Magnus,  Bishop 
of  the  Wales  Ward,  Moroni  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930,  was  born 
Jan.  2,  1881,  in  Braband,  Aarhus  amt, 
Denmark,  a  son  of  Anders  Peter  Ja- 
cobsen  and  Ane  Marie  Madsen.  He 
was  baptized  Jan.  7,  1890,  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1884,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  14,  1924,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  8, 
1929,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

JENSEN,  Andreas,  Bishop  of  the 
Freedom  Ward,  Moroni  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1907  to  1912,  was  born  Dec.  4, 
1844,  in  Farre,  Skanderborg  amt, 
Denmark,  a  son  of  Peter  Jensen  and 
Kjersten  Andersen.  He  was  baptized 
in  April,  1861,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1862,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
28,  1898,  by  Henry  Beal  and  a  Bishop 
June  9,  1907,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 
He  died  Aug.  10,  1913. 

JOHNSON,  Ernest  James,  second 
counselor  in  the  Moroni  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1929  to  1930,  was 
born  April  21,  1891,  in  Fountain 
Green,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Alfred  Johnson  and  Marie  Jensen  Pe- 
tersen. He  was  baptized  May  22,  1900, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1923-1926, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op of  the  Fountain  Green  Ward  July 
11,  1926,  by  David  O.  McKay  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  June  16, 
1929,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

JOHNSON,  George  Washington, 

presiding  Elder  of  the  Fountain  Green 
Branch,  Moroni  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1859  to  1860,  was  born  Feb.  19,  1823, 
in  Pomfret,  Chautauqua  Co.,  N.  Y.,  a 
son  of  Ezekiel  Johnson  and  Julia  Hills. 
He  was  baptized  April  9,  1836,  came 
to  Utah  in  1851  and  was  set  apart  as 
presiding  Elder  by  Orson  Hyde  in  1859. 


JOHNSON,  Robert  Lewis,  Bishop 
of  the  Fountain  Green  Ward,  Moroni 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1862  to  1883,  was 
born  Aug.  17,  1819,  in  London,  Can- 
ada, a  son  of  Edward  Johnson  and 
Sarah  Brown.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
22,  1842,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  May  11,  1862,  by  Orson 
Hyde.     He  died  in  June,  1901. 

LIVINGSTON,  Abram,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Moroni  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  2,  1887,  in  Fountain  Green,  San- 
pete Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  Liv- 
ingston and  Lillias  Dick.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  4,  1927,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  June  16,  1929,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

LOWRY,  James  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Freedom  Ward,  Moroni  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1900  to  1904,  was  born 
Feb.  25,  1863,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Abner  Lowry  and  Louisa  Bradley. 
He  was  baptized  June  9,  1872,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  June  27,  1900,  by 
Anthon  H.  Lund. 

MAJOR,  Frederick  Reynaldo,  Bish- 
op of  the  Wales  Ward,  Moroni  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1929,  was  born 
July  21,  1888,  in  Bountiful,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  D.  Major  and 
Virginia  F.  McMaster.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  11,  1897,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  14,  1924, 
by   Rudger   Clawson. 

MORLEY,  George  F.,  Bishop  of  the 
Freedom  Ward,  Moroni  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1904  to  1907,  was  born  Sept.  30, 
1852,  in  Manti,  Utah,  a  son  of  Isaac 
Morley  and  Abiah  Bradley.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  30,  1863,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  March  6,  1904,  by  Anthon  H. 
Lund.     He  died  Jan.  10,  1915. 

NELSON,  Ephraim,  Bishop  of  the 
Moroni    West    Ward,    Moroni    Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


537 


Utah,  from  1921  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
Sept.  30,  1865,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Jens  Christian  Nielsen  and  Anna 
Andersen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  27, 
1876,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  Stated  in 
1900-1902,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  12,  1915,  by  James  E.  Talmage 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  18,  1921, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

NIELSEN,  James  Louis,  president 
of  the  Moroni  Stake,  Utah,  from  1929 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept.  7,  1872,  in 
Fountain  Green,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Lars  Nielsen  and  Marie  Miko- 
line  Christiansen.  He  was  baptized 
April  6,  1881,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Indian 
Territory  in  1896-1898,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Sept.  13,  1908,  ordained 
Bishop  of  the  Fountain  Green  Ward 
March  20,  1921,  by  James  E.  Talmage 
and  was  set  apart  as  Stake  president 
June  16,  1929,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

OLDROYD,  John  Thomas,  Bishop 
of  the  Fountain  Green  Ward,  Moroni 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1915  to  1921,  was 
born  May  10,  1888,  in  Fountain  Green, 
Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
Jolly  Oklroyd  and  Mary  Ann  Morgan. 
He  was  baptized  in  1896,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  15, 
1915,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

THOMPSON,  Nels  Albert,  Bishop 
of  the  Chester  Ward,  Moroni  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1915  to  1924,  was  born 
May  20,  1873,  in  Ephraim,  Sanpete 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Nils  Thomsen  and 
Mary  Catherine  Herman.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1902-1904, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  12,  1915,  by  James  E. 
Talmage. 


Morgan  Stake 

ANDERSON,    Everett    Elydore, 

Bishop   of  the   North   Morgan   Ward, 


Morgan  Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to 
1928,  was  born  Jan.  4,  1893,  in  Lehi, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Brigham  J. 
Anderson  and  Rachel  Woodhouse.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  yeai'S 
old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  17, 
1922,  by  James  E.  Talmage,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  March  29,  1925,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

CARRIGAN,  James,  presiding  Eld- 
er of  the  Peterson  Branch,  Morgan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1879  to  1883,  and 
Bishop  of  the  Peterson  Ward  from 
1884  to  1889,  was  born  in  1841,  in  Ire- 
land. He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1862, 
after  laboring  as  a  missionary  in 
England  for  seven  years,  and  was  or- 
dained   a    Bishop   in    1884. 

CARRIGAN,  James  William,  Bish- 
op of  the  Peterson  Ward,  Morgan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1928,  was 
born  June  30,  1865,  in  Peterson,  Mor- 
gan Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  Carri- 
gan  and  Lois  Bent.  He  was  baptized 
in  1873,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 
5,  1891,  by  Willard  G.  Smith  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  July  11,  1920,  by 
George   F.   Richards. 

CARRUTH,  John  Ellwood,  Bishop 
of  the  Slide  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1918  to  1919,  was  born 
March  12,  1883,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  Carruth  and  Emma 
Wilde.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1891, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  25,  1912, 
by  George  W.  Young,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  June  15,  1918,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

CARTER,  Daniel,  Bishop  of  the 
Porterville  W  a  r  d,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  .  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  23.) 

CARTER,  George  Edward,  Bishop 
of  the  Porterville  Ward,  Morgan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1920,  was 
born  April  1,  1867,  in  Round  Valley, 
Morgan  Co.,   Utah,  a  son  of  Samuel 


538 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Carter  and  Sarah  Davis.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1875,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  3,  1917,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith. 

CARTER,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the 
West  Porterville  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1882  to  1897,  was  born 
Sept.  1,  1836,  in  Wardington,  Oxford- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  John  Carter 
and  Mary  Temms.  He  was  baptized 
in  October,  1851,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Nov.  19,  1882,  by  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ards. 

DICKSON,  Bert  Stoddard,  Bishop 
of  the  Slide  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
May  2,  1892,  in  Richville,  Morgan  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Albert  D.  Dickson  and 
Harriet  R.  Flint.  He  was  baptized  in 
May,  1900,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1914-1917,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  14,  1919,  by  James 
E.  Talmage  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
March  27,  1926,  by  George  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

FRANCIS,  Howard,  Bishop  of  the 
Morgan  Ward,  Morgan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1926  to  1930  + ,  was  born  Nov. 
2,  1894,  in  Morgan,  Morgan  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Samuel  P'rancis,  jun.,  and 
Sarah  Jane  Ursenbach.  He  was  bap- 
tized Nov.  10,  1902,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  28, 
1926,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

GEARY,  Charles  Calvin,  second 
counselor  in  the  Morgan  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1927  to  1930  +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  7,  1891,  in  Morgan,  Morgan 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Hyrum  P.  Geary 
and  Isabel  M.  Gibby.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  23,  1899,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  14,  1921,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman  and  was  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  Oct.  2,  1927,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 


GILES,  William,  Bishop  of  the  Mil- 
ton Ward,  Morgan  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1893  to  1921,  was  born  June  3,  1867,  in 
Milton,  Morgan  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  H.  Giles  and  Ann  Kingman.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  15,  1875,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
in  June,  1893,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

HEINER,    George    Sylvester,    first 

counselor  in  the  Morgan  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  March  2,  1886,  in  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Daniel  Hein- 
er  and  Sarah  J,  Coulam.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1907-1909, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  Dec.  9,  1923, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard.  He  was  pro- 
moted to  the  position  of  first  counselor 
Dec.  31,  1926. 

HEINER,  Horace,  Bishop  of  the 
North  Morgan  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930,  was  born  May  1,  1888, 
in  Morgan,  Morgan  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  George  Heiner  and  Sarah  Jane  Log- 
gart.  He  was  baptized  May  1,  1896, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  Australia  in  1910-1912,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March  8, 
1925,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HOPKIN,  Frank  D.,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Croydon  Branch,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1903  to  1904  and  Bishop 
of  Croydon  Ward,  from  1904  to  1907, 
was  born  March  12,  1873,  in  Croydon, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Hopkin  and  Mary 
Pennington.  He  was  baptized  May 
28,  1883,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  13,  1904,  by  George 
Albert  Smith. 

JENSEN,  Cyrus,  Bishop  of  the  Slide 
Ward,  Morgan  Stake,  Utah,  from  1914 
to  1918,  was  born  May  5,  1883,  in 
Logan,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  Peter 
Jensen  and  Mary  K.  Lai-sen.     He  was 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


539 


baptized  May  5,  1892,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  31,  1914, 
by  David  O.  McKay. 

KNIGHT,  George,  Bishop  of  tlie 
Croydon  Ward,  Morgan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1887  to  1895,  was  born  Sept.  29, 
1819,  in  Elmbridge,  Worcestershire, 
England,  a  son  of  James  Knight  and 
Maria  Wallace.  He  was  baptized  in 
1844,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  July  19, 
1887,  by  Lorenzo  Snow.  He  died  Dec. 
21,  1895. 

MECHAM,     Joseph     Lyman,     jun,. 

Bishop  of  the  Milton  Ward,  Morgan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  June  27  to  De- 
cember 19,  1926,  was  born  May  26, 
1883,  in  Milton,  Morgan  County,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Joseph  Lyman  Mecham 
and  Annie  Giles.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  8,  1891,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  and  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Milton  Ward  June  27,  1926, 
by  George  Albert  Smith. 

MECHAM,     Joseph     Lyman,     sen., 

Bishop  of  the  Milton  Ward,  Morgan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1889  to  1892,  was 
born  Sept.  26,  1856,  at  E  T  City, 
Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  L. 
Mecham  and  Maria  Tuttle.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  7,  1865,  filled  a  mission 
to  New  Zealand  in  1887-1888,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  in  May,  1889,  by 
John  W.  Taylor. 

PARKER,  Wyman  Mynard,  Bishop 
of  the  North  Morgan  Ward,  Morgan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1881,  was 
born  April  2,  1828,  in  Franklin,  Dela- 
ware Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Wyman  Park- 
er and  Maria  Mynard.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  4,  1850,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1850,  was  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1876-1878,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  1,  1877, 
by  Franklin  D.  Richards.  (See  also 
Parker  W  a  r  d,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Idaho.) 


PARKINSON,     William     Brigham, 

Bishop  of  the  North  Morgan  Ward, 
Morgan  Stake,  Utah,  from  1881  to 
1883,  was  born  April  4,  1852,  in  Brad- 
ford, Yorkshire,  England,  a  son  of 
John  Parkinson  and  Mary  Woffinden. 
He  was  baptized  in  1860,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1879-1880,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  15,  1881,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
He  died  Nov.  19,  1920. 

PARRISII,  Ezra,  Bishop  of  the  Pe- 
terson Ward,  Morgan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1906  to  1909,  was  born  Sept.  28, 
1871,  in  Centerville,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Joel  Parrish  and  Emma  Ford. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  nine 
years  of  age,  ordained  a  Seventy 
March  20,  1897,  by  George  Teasdale, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1897-1899,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  March,  1902,  by  Rudger  Clawson, 
who  also  ordained  him  a  Bishop  March 
25,  1906. 

PETERSON,  Charles  Shreeve,  Bish- 
op of  the  Peterson  Ward,  Morgan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1861  to  1877,  was 
born  July  28,  1818,  in  Mt.  Olive,  Bur- 
lington Co.,  New  York,  a  son  of  An- 
drew Peterson  and  Martha  Murdock. 
He  was  baptized  in  1843,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1869,  and  was  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  Dec.  8,  1861. 

PORTER,  Hyrum  Kilburn,  Bishop 
of  the  Porterville  Wai'd,  Morgan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1926,  was 
born  Dec.  12,  1878,  in  Porterville, 
Morgan  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Lyman  W. 
Porter  and  Mariah  Kilburn.  He  was 
baptized  July  31,  1887,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1904-1906,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  31,  1914,  by 
David  O.  McKay  and  sustained  as 
Bishop  July  4,  1920. 

RANDALL,  Melvin  Howard,  presi- 
dent of  the  Morgan  Stake,  Utah,  from 


540 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


1923  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  10,  1879, 
in  Centerville,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Melvin  H.  Randall  and  Frankie 
Phelps.  He  was  baptized  June  9,  1888, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1900-1902,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  23,  1906,  by  Daniel  Heiner  and 
set  apart  as  president  Dec.  9,  1923, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

RICH,  William  Henry,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Morgan  Stake  presidency 
from  1893  to  1900,  and  first  counselor 
from  1900  to  1923,  was  born  Sept.  4, 
IF  57,  in  Centerville,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Henry  Rich  and  Lydia 
Pond.  He  was  baptized  May  15,  1869, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1885-1887,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  April  21,  1893,  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 
On  Sept.  9,  1900,  he  was  set  apart  as 
first  counselor.  He  died  Sept.  29,  1923. 

R0B15INS,  Joseph  Burtis,  Bishop  of 
the  Peterson  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1898  to  1906,  was  born 
June  28,  1867,  in  Logan,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  Burtis  Robbins 
and  Jane  Andline  Young.  He  was 
baptized  in  1875,  and  ordained  Bishop 
in  June,  1898. 

ROSE,  John  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Richville  Ward,  Morgan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1914  to  1928,  was  born  Feb.  28, 
1872,  in  Stoddard,  Morgan  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Olof  Rose  and  Mary  Brink. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  old,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  Sweden  in  1900- 
1903,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  26,  1906,  by  Rudger  Clawson, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  29,  1914, 
by  James  E.  Talmage. 

SPENDLOVE,   Joseph   Franklin, 

Bishop  of  the  Milton  Ward,  Mox'gan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1926,  was 
born  March  14,  1877,  in  Littleton, 
Morgan   Co.,   Utah,  a   son   of  Joseph 


Spendlove  and  Harriet  Payne.  He  was 
baptized  July  2,  1885,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  7,  1901,  by  Lyman  Porter, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  11,  1921, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

TAGGART,  George  Albert,  Bishop 
of  the  Morgan  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1926,  was  born 
Nov.  25,  1872,  in  Morgan,  Morgan  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  George  H.  Taggart 
and  Jessie  McNiven.  He  was  baptized 
April  23,  1881,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  27,  1925,  by 
John  A.  Widtsoe. 

TOONE,  Claudius  Conrad,  Bishop 
of  the  Croydon  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  25,  1902,  in  Croydon,  Morgan 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Wilford 
Toone  and  Harriet  B.  Grover.  He  was 
baptized  June  17,  1911,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1924-1926,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  26,  1926,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

TOONE,   James   Melvin,   Bishop   of 

the  Croydon  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1926,  was  born 
Sept.  13,  1888,  in  Croydon,  Morgan 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  H.  Toone 
and  Hannah  Webb.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  of  age,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1913-1916,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  9,  1917,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

TOONE,  William  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Croydon  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1909  to  1917,  was  born 
March  3,  1842,  in  Leamington,  War- 
wickshire, England,  a  son  of  John 
Toone  and  Emma  Prosser.  He  was 
baptized  in  1851,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1852,  was  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1897-1898,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  19,  1887,  by  Lorenzo  Snow 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  June  13,  1909, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


541 


by  Orson  F.  Whitney.     He  died  Dec. 
25,  1923. 

WHITEAR,  Eli,  Bishop  of  the  Mil- 
ton Ward,  Morgan  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1877  to  1888,  was  born  April  25,  1827, 
in  Preston,  Candover,  Hampshire, 
England,  a  son  of  John  Whitear,  and 
Rachel  Hitchcock.  He  was  baptized 
Feb.  21,  1854,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1854,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  July 
1,  1877,  by  Lorenzo  Snow. 

WHITTIER,  Herbert  James,  Bishop 
of  the  Milton  Ward,  Morgan  Stake, 
Utah,  froiTi  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  13,  1891,  in  Milton,  Morgan  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  A.  Whittier  and 
Annie  Madsen.  He  was  baptized  July 
9,  1904,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
15,  1925,  by  George  Albert  Smith  and 
a  Bishop  Dec.  19,  1926,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 


Mount  Ogden  Stake 

BURTON,  Robert  Ibbotson,  presi- 
dent of  the  Mount  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb. 
9,  1879,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam Walton  Burton  and  Rachel  Field- 
ing. He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in  1899- 
1902,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
15,  1916,  by  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff,  and 
set  apart  as  president  May  21,  1922. 

BYBEE,  David  B.,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Uintah  Branch,  Mount  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1861  to  1864,  was 
born  Sept.  17,  1832,  in  Byram  County, 
Kentucky.  He  was  appointed  presid- 
ing Elder  in  June,  1861,  and  died  Feb. 
22,  1893. 

COOK,  David  Simpson,  Bishop  of 
the  South  Weber  Ward,  Mount  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1890,  was 
born  Jan.  19,  1829,  in  Kincardine, 
Perthshire,  Scotland,  a  son  of  David 


Cook  and  Margaret  Simpson.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  3,  1846,  and  ordained 
Bishop  June  29,  1877,  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards.     He  died  May  5,  1890. 

DYE,  Jonathan,  presiding  Elder 
pro  tern,  of  the  Uintah  Branch,  Mount 
Ogden  Stake,  Utah,  from  1869  to 
1870,  was  born  Oct.  10,  1829,  in  Hert- 
ford, England,  a  son  of  Thomas  Dye 
and  Sarah  Gower.  He  was  baptized 
May  26,  1852  and  died  April  24,  1907. 

EARL,  Clarence  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  South  Weber  Ward,  Mount  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1915  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Jan.  4,  1884,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  Wright  Earl 
and  Elizabeth  Poll.  He  was  baptized 
July  6,  1893,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  18,  1915,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

FERNELIUS,  Adolph  Gustaf,  Bish- 
op of  the  Uintah  Ward,  Mount  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  July  12,  1873,  in  Danielson, 
Meeker  Co.,  Minnesota,  a  son  of  Peter 
Gustaf  Fernelius  and  Johanna  C. 
Lindberg.  He  was  baptized  July  12, 
1882,  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Lewis 
W.  Shurtliff,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  11, 
1928,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 

HALVERSON,    Charles.  Albert, 

Bishop  of  the  Ogden  17th  Ward, 
Mount  Ogden  Stake,  Utah,  from  1924 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  19,  1871,  in 
Marriott,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Simon  Fredrick  Halverson  and  Inge- 
borg  Gurine  Fredriksen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  24,  1879,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Nor- 
way in  1899-1901,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  13,  1909,  by  John 
Watson,  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Ogden  5th 
Ward  April  18,  1923,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards;  he  was  set  apart  as  Bishop 
of  the  Ogden  17th  Ward  July  28,  1924, 
by  George  F.  Richards, 


542 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


HARBERTSON,    James    Moffat, 

Bishop  of  the  Ogden  14th  Ward, 
Mount  Ogden  Stake,  Utah,  from  1924 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  23,  1892, 
in  South  Weber,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  William  Harbertson  and 
Mary  Moffat.  He  was  baptized  July 
1,  1900,  ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
27,  1919,  by  David  O.  McKay,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  28,  1924,  by 
Rudger   Clawson. 

KEN  DELL,  George  AVilkeson,  Bish- 
op of  the  South  Weber  Ward,  Mount 
Ogden  Stake,  Utah,  from  1891  to  1909, 
and  from  ]910  to  1914,  was  born  April 
21,  1856,  in  South  Webei-,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  Kendell  and 
Johanna  Peek.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  twelve  years  old,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  25, 
1891,  by  Franklin  D.  Richards.  He 
died  Oct.  24,  1924. 

KEYES,  Alma,  Bishop  of  the  Uin- 
tah Ward,  Mount  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1895  to  1917,  was  born  Aug.  10, 
1839,  in  Adams  County,  Hlinois,  a  son 
of  Harrison  Keyes  and  Eliza  Herrick. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  13,  1857,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  19,  1886,  by 
Franklin  D.  Richards,  and  was  or- 
dained Bishop  Aug.  11,  1895,  by 
Franklin  D.  Richards.  He  died  Sept. 
8,   1918. 

McFARLANE,  Joseph  Clark,  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Mount  Ogden 
Stake  presidency,  Utah,  from  1922  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  1,  1874,  in  Og- 
den, Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James 
McFarlane  and  Martha  Ann  Smuin. 
He  was  baptized  in  1882,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1897-1900,  and  when 
the  Mount  Ogden  Stake  was  organized 
May  21,  1922,  he  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  and  set  apart  by  President 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

MORRIS,  Clarence,  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden     14th     Ward,     Mount     Ogden 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1924,  was 
born  March  16,  1887,  in  Hunter,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  N. 
Morris  and  Sarah  A.  Grove.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  30,  1895,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  27, 
1919,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

OSBORN,  Thomas  Jefferson,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Uintah  Ward  (for- 
merly the  East  Weber  Ward),  Mount 
Ogden  Stake,  Utah,  from  1858  to  1861, 
was  born  Feb.  20,  1829,  in  Green  Coun- 
ty, Indiana,  a  son  of  David  and  Cyn- 
thia Oirborn.  He  was  baptized  when 
nine  years  old,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1852,  and  was  appointed  presiding 
Elder  in  March,  1858. 

PETTY,  William  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden  5th  Ward,  Mount  Ogden  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1927,  was  born 
March  27,  1874,  in  Richmond,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Robert  I.  Petty 
and  Julia  Ann  Wright.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1882,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  28,  1924,  by 
George  F.  Richards. 

RIDGES,  Wilford  Owen,  Bishop  of 
the  Ogden  9th  Ward,  Mount  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1909  to  1923,  was 
born  Sept.  5,  1866,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  H.  Ridges  and 
Agatha  Walker,  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  1,  1875,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1892-1895,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  28,  1898,  by 
Wm.  C.  Parkinson  and  a  Bishop  July 
4,  1909,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

RIRIE,  Joseph,  first  counselor  in 
the  Mount  Ogden  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  27,  1872,  in  West  Weber,  Weber 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  Ririe  and 
Ann  Boyack.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
10,  1882,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1901-1903,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  5,  1910,  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  May  21,  1922,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


543 


SHAW,  Austin  Herman,  Bishop  of 
the  Ogden  5th  Ward,  Mount  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  April  9,  1884,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Myrtillo  Shaw  and  Anna  H. 
Cardon.  He  was  baptized  July  7,  1892, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1910-1912, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  July  9, 
1916,  by  John  V.  Bluth,  and  a  Bishop 
April  3,  1927,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

SHORTEN,  David  George,  Bishop 
of  the  Ogden  18th  Ward,  Mount  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1926,  was 
born  July  29,  1883,  in  Ogden,  Weber 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  George  Shorten 
and  Elizabeth  Ellis.  He  was  baptized 
July  29,  1891,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  19,  1915,  by  A.  W.  Horsley  and 
a  Bishop  July  28,  1924,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

SPAULDING,  Ira  N.,  Bishop  of  the 
Uintah  Ward,  Mount  Ogden  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1878  to  1882,  was  born 
April  16,  1809,  in  Crown  Point,  Essex 
Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Stephen  G.  Spauld- 
ing  and  Phoebe  Lawrence.  He  was 
baptized  Feb.  12,  1842,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  15,  1877,  by  Robert 
McQuarrie,  and  a  Bishop  July  21,  1878, 
by  Franklin  D.  Richards. 

STODDARD,     H  y  r  u  m     Franklin, 

Bishop  of  the  Uintah  Ward,  Mount 
Ogden  Stake,  Utah,  from  1886  to  1889, 
was  born  Sept.  29,  1849,  in  Council 
Bluffs,  Iowa,  a  son  of  Charles  Stod- 
dard and  Lucretia  Murdock.  He  was 
baptized  in  1857,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  29,  1886,  by 
John  W.  Taylor.  He  died  Feb.  19,  1889. 

TERRY,  William  Zimmerman,  Bish- 
op of  the  Ogden  18th  Ward,  Mount 
Ogden  Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  March  28,  1872,  in 
Lewiston,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  A. 
Terry  and  Susan  Zimmerman.  He 
was  baptized  March  28,  1880,  ordained 


to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
Germany  in  1896-1899,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb. 
24,  1909,  by  Heber  J.  Grant.  He  pre- 
sided over  the  Coalville  Ward,  Sum- 
mitt  Stake,  in  1909-1912. 

URE,  James  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden  5th  Ward,  Mount  Ogden  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1914  to  1923,  was  born 
March  31,  1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  William  Ure  and 
F.  A.  Cunningham.  He  was  baptized 
in  May,  1880,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  13,  1910,  by  Charles  F.  Middle- 
ton,  and  a  Bishop  April  28,  1914,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

WILSON,  David  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Ogden  12th  Ward,  Mount  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Oct.  27,  1887,  in  Midway,  Wa- 
satch Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  Brig- 
ham  Wilson  and  Margaret  Powell.  He 
was  baptized  March  15,  1896,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  May  22,  1922,  by  David 
O.  McKay,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  28,  1924,  by  Reed  Smoot. 


Nebo  Stake 


BROADBENT,  William  Francis, 

Bishop  of  the  Santaquin  1st  Ward, 
Nebo  Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to 
1930  +  ,  was  born  Feb.  2,  1887,  in 
Mona,  Utah,  the  son  of  James  T. 
Broadbent  and  Sarah  Alice  Jarvis.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  5,  1927,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

CIIATWIN,  William  Albert,  Bishop 
of  the  Santaquin  2nd  Ward,  Nebo 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1929,  was 
born  Sept.  3,  1875,  in  Santaquin,  the 
son  of  William  Chatwin  and  Irena 
Carter.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  11, 
1883,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
15,  1903,  by  Isaac  H.  Grace,  and  a 
Bishop  Dec.  28,  1924,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 


544 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


CHEEVER,    George    Albert    Smith, 

Bishop  of  the  Payson  4th  Ward,  Nebo 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  July  8,  1892,  in  Provo,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  E.  Cheever  and  Grace 
Libby  Smith.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
5,  1900,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 
5,  1925,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith,  and  a 
Bishop  Oct.  27,  1929,  by  James  E. 
Talmage. 

CLAYTON,  Raymond  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Payson  3rd  Ward,  Nebo  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1926,  was  born 
Dec.  29,  1880,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  Clayton  and  Cornelia 
Home.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  1,  1889, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1902-1904,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  9,  1909,  by  Heber  J.  Grant, 
and  a  Bishop  Dec.  28,  1924,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

DIXON,  William  D.,  Bishop  of  the 
Payson  1st  Ward,  Nebo  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1921  to  1924,  was  born  Feb.  20, 
1874,  in  Payson,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Charles  H.  Dixon  and  Matilda  Doug- 
las. He  was  baptized  May  4,  1882, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1895-1898,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  20,  1921, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

ERLANDSON,    Otto    Bernhard, 

Bishop  of  the  Payson  1st  Ward,  Nebo 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  20,  1867,  in  Malmo,  Sweden, 
the  son  of  Elias  Erlandson  and  Kjer- 
sti  Lundsted.  He  emigrated  to  Amer- 
ica in  1870,  was  baptized  June  1,  1876, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op April  8,  1928,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
aids. 

GREENHALGH,    Albert    Augustus, 

Bishop  of  the  Santaquin  2nd  Ward, 
Nebo  Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  5,  1878,  in  San- 
taquin, the  son  of  Ezekiel  Greenhalgh 
and  Emma  Caroline  Arenson  Nelson. 
He  was  baptized  June  16,  1887,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  4,  1927,  by 


Geo.  Albert  Smith,  and  a  Bishop  June 
23,  1929,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HOLLADAY,  John  Martin,  Bishop 
of  the  Santaquin  Ward,  Nebo  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1895  to  1919,  was  born 
April  10,  1857,  in  San  Bernardino, 
Calif.,  the  son  of  David  H.  HoUaday 
and  Henrietta  Taylor.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  6,  1889, 
by  Geo.  Q.  Cannon,  and  a  Bishop  Oct. 
23,   1895,  by   Francis   M.   Lyman. 

HANSEN,  Isaac,  Bishop  of  the 
Benjamin  Ward,  Nebo  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1900  to  1904,  was  born  April  5, 
1862,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Jens  Hansen  and  Karen  Petersen. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  18,  1900. 

HILL,  Jasper  Franklin,  Bishop  of 
the  Payson  2nd  Ward,  Nebo  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1930,  was  born 
Sept.  2,  1877,  in  Payson,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Allison  H.  Hill  and  Lurancy 
Chase.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1885, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Aug.  22,  1920,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

LeBARON,    George   Washington, 

Bishop  of  the  Santaquin  Ward,  Nebo 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1924,  and 
of  the  Santaquin  1st  Ward  from  1924 
to  1927,  was  born  Jan.  28,  1863,  in 
Santaquin,  the  son  of  David  T.  Le- 
Baron  and  Esther  M.  Johnson.  He 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  23,  1919, 
by  David  0.  McKay. 

LUNDELL,  Henry  Godfrey,  Bishop 
of  the  Benjamin  Ward,  Nebo  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 -|-,  was  born 
Jan.  19,  1890,  in  South  Cottonwood, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Andrew  G.  Lundell 
and  Charlotte  Mattson.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  3,  1898,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Jan.  19,  1911,  by  Seymour  B.  Young, 
filled  a  mission  to  Sweden  in  1911- 
1913,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Dec.  27,  1924,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


545 


OLESON,  John  Forest,  Bishop  of 
the  Payson  2nd  Ward,  Nebo  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  2, 
1877,  in  Hooper,  Utah,  the  son  of  Oley 
Oleson  and  Emma  E.  Rideout.  He  was 
baptized  June  4,  1885,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Jan.  8,  1908,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1911-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
March  23,  1930,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

OPENSHAW,  Eli,  Bishop  of  the 
Santaquin  Ward,  Nebo  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1889  to  1895,  was  born  Feb.  1, 
1835,  in  Lancashire,  England,  the  son 
of  William  Openshaw  and  Ann  Green- 
halgh.  He  was  baptized  when  thirteen 
years  old,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1854, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  6, 
1877,  and  a  Bishop  March  3,  1889.  He 
died  Dec.  3,  1899. 

PAGE,  Arzo  Curtis,  first  counselor 
in  the  Nebo  Stake  presidency,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  7, 
1887,  in  Payson,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Jonathan  S.  Page,  jun.,  and  Lillyus 
M.  Curtis.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  and  ordained  an  Elder 
Feb.  3,  1906,  by  his  father,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1909- 
1911,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  3,  1911,  by  Reed  Smoot.  He  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  Nov.  23, 
1924,  by  John  A.  Widtsoe. 

POWELL,  Albert  Harris,  second 
counselor  in  the  Nebo  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1924  to  1930,  was 
born  Feb.  13,  1883,  in  Payson,  Utah, 
the  son  of  William  Powell  and  Chris- 
tiane  Petersen.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  and  after  being  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  1908  by  J.  Golden 
Kimball,  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1908-1911.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor 
in  the  stake  presidency  Nov.  23,  1924, 
by  John  A.  Widtsoe.  He  died  at  Salt 
Lake  City  July  17,  1930. 

Vol.  IV,  No.  35 


STEWART,  Andrew  Jackson  Bar- 
rett, Bishop  of  the  Benjamin  Ward, 
Nebo  Stake,  Utah,  from  1886  to  1900, 
was  born  Feb.  28,  1861,  in  Payson, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Benjamin  Franklin 
Stewart  and  Elizabeth  J.  Davis.  He 
was  baptized  March  4,  1869,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
12,  1886,  by  Franklin  D.  Richards. 

TAYLOR,  Jesse  Soar,  Bishop  of  the 
Payson  2nd  Ward,  Nebo  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1901  to  1909,  was  born  Aug.  29, 
1845,  near  Eastwood,  Nottingham- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  William 
Jesse  Taylor  and  Mary  Soar.  He  was 
baptized  in  1854,  came  to  Utah  in  1856, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Muddy  in 
1868-1871.  Later  he  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop.  He  died  Oct. 
6,  1933. 

TAYLOR,  Lee  Raymond,  president 
of  the  Nebo  Stake  of  Zion,  Utah,  from 
1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  8, 
1884,  in  Goshen,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Zachariah  Shadrack  Taylor  and  Nellie 
Olsen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  4,  1892, 
filled  a  mission  to  California  in  1904- 
1905,  and  was  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Nebo  Stake  Nov.  13,  1924,  by 
John  A.  Widtsoe. 

TAYLOR,  Samuel  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Payson  2nd  Ward,  Nebo  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1913  to  1917,  was  born  Oct.  28, 
1873,  in  Payson,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Jesse  S.  Taylor  and  Sarah  A.  Marsh. 
He  was  baptized  in  1887,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  12,  1913, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

TAYLOR,  William  Jesse,  Bishop  of 
the  Spring  Lake  Ward,  Nebo  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1901  to  1921,  was  born 
June  23,  1867,  in  Payson,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Jesse  S.  Taylor  and  Sarah  A. 
Marsh.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1875, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  24,  1901,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

Aug.  29,  1936 


546 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


TWEDE,  Herman,  Bishop  of  the 
Spring  Lake  Ward,  Nebo  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1921  to  1930,  was  born  Aug.  22, 
1873,  in  Provo,  Utah,  the  son  of  Chr. 
Fred.  N.  Twede  and  Christiane  Peter- 
sen. He  was  baptized  Jan.  21,  1897, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Feb.  25,  1922,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

WILSON,  Alfred  R.,  Bishop  of  the 
Payson  1st  Ward,  Nebo  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1928,  was  born  Oct.  1, 
1882,  in  Payson,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Thomas  H.  Wilson  and  Caroline  Mar- 
chant.  He  was  baptized  June  2,  1892, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  28,  1924,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

WILSON,  Robert  Lorenzo,  Bishop  of 
the  Payson  3rd  Ward,  Nebo  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  24,  1878,  in  Payson,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Thomas  Henry  Wilson  and  Caro- 
line Marchant.  He  was  baptized  June 
6,  1889,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  March  14,  1926,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards. 

YOUNG,  Joseph  Watson.  Bishop  of 
the  Payson  Ward,  Nebo  Stake,  Utah, 
fi-om  1861  to  1862,  was  born  Jan.  12, 
1829,  at  Mendon,  Monroe  Co.,  N.  Y., 
the  son  of  Lorenzo  Dow  Young  and 
Persis  Goodall.  He  came  to  Utah  in 
1847,  filled  a  mission  to  Europe  in  1857- 
1858,  and  became  Bishop  of  Payson 
Nov.  4,  1861,  having  been  previously 
ordained  as  a  Bishop.  He  died  June  7, 
1873. 


Nevada  Stake 


ARNOLDSEN,  Hyrum  Smith,  Bish- 
op of  the  Preston  Ward,  Nevada  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1901  to  1912,  was  born 
July  27,  1866,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Lars  Chr.  Arnoldsen  and  Else  Mor- 
tensen.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1896-1898,  and  was 


ordained    a    High    Priest    and    Bishop 
Oct.  12,  1901,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

ARNOLDSON,  Pharo,  Bishop  of  the 
Preston  Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  Nevada, 
from  1926  to  1928,  was  born  Jan.  6, 
1895,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  a  son  of  Hans 
J.  Arnoldson  and  Mary  A.  Mallison. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  30,  1903,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  25,  1925, 
by  John  V.  Bluth,  and  a  Bishop  Sept. 
19,  1926,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

CAMPBELL,  William  D.,  Bishop  of 
the  McGill  Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  Ne- 
vada, from  1922  to  1923,  was  born 
Sept.  25,  1879,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Campbell  and  Agnes 
Brown.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  4,  1887, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  25,  1919, 
by  Francis  W.  Stratford,  and  a  Bish- 
op May  21,  1922,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

HERMANSEN,      Christian,      j  u  n.. 

Bishop  of  the  Preston  Ward,  Nevada 
Stake,  Nevada,  from  1912  to  1918, 
was  born  Aug.  27,  1882,  in  Sevier, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Christian  Hermansen 
and  Karen  Pedersen.  He  was  baptized 
Jan.  28,  1891,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1907-1909,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  27,  1912,  by  Francis  W.  Stratford 
of  the  North  Weber  Stake  presidency. 

HORLACHER,  John  Frederick,  first 
counselor  in  the  Nevada  Stake  presi- 
dency, Nevada,  from  1926  to  1930,  was 
born  Dec.  7,  1884,  in  Rublinger,  Wur- 
temberg,  Germany,  a  son  of  Michael 
Horlacher  and  Marie  Schuler.  He  was 
baptized  in  April,  1904,  in  Dublin,  Ire- 
land, came  to  America  in  1906,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Sept.  19,  1926, 
by  Rudger  Clawson  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  in  the  Nevada  Stake 
presidency. 

HORTON,  John  Earl,  Bishop  of  the 
McGill  Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  Nevada, 
from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  1, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


547 


1897,  in  Greenville,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
Alma  Horton  and  Harriet  Heslinftton. 
He  was  baptized  July  5,  1905,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1916- 
1919,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  July 
20,  1919,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith,  and  a 
Bishop  Oct.  16,  1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

HYDE,  Wilford  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Metropolis  Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  Ne- 
vada, from  1912  to  1916,  was  chosen  as 
Bishop  Feb.  12, 1912,  and  served  in  this 
capacity  until  1916,  when  he  died  Feb. 
3,  1916,  in  Ogden,  Utah. 

JOHNSON,  Gustaf  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
McGill  Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  Nevada, 
from  1923  to  1926,  was  born  Nov.  5, 
1877,  in  Eskilstuna,  Sodermanland, 
Sweden,  the  son  of  John  Johnson  and 
Caroline  C.  Johnson.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  1,  1906,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Dec.  21,  1923,  by  Francis  W. 
Stratford. 

KNIGHTON,  Daniel  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  McGill  Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  Ne- 
vada, from  1926  to  1927,  was  born 
Nov.  5,  1890,  in  East  Bountiful,  Utah, 
the  son  of  George  Knighton  and  Eliza 
Johnson.     He   was   baptized   May   24, 

1900,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  19,  1926,  by  David  0. 
McKay. 

JUDD,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the  Lund 
Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  Nevada,  from 
1901  to  1902,  was  born  Sept.  1,  1845, 
in  Birkenhead,  Cheshire,  England,  the 
son  of  Samuel  Judd  and  Catherine 
Hindes.  He  was  baptized  April  26, 
1864,  acted  as  Bishop  in  the  White 
Pine  Ward  from  Aug.  18  to  Oct.   13, 

1901,  and  then  presided  over  the  Lund 
Ward.     He  died  June  7,  1922. 

LIDDLE,  Parley  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
McGill  Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  Nevada, 
from  1912  to  1914,  was  born  Oct.  28, 
1883,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Edward  J.  McGill  and  Maria  A.  Sears. 


He  was  baptized  Oct.  31,  1891.  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb. 
26,  1912,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

PETERSEN,  Andrew  Lothrap,  Bish- 
op of  the  Preston  Ward,  Nevada  Stake, 
Nevada,  from  1928  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
May  29,  1896,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Peter  Martin  Petersen  and  Laura 
Draper.  He  was  baptized  July  24, 
1904,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  25, 
1925,  by  John  V.  Bluth,  and  a  Bishop 
April  8,  1928,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

SNOW,  Orrin  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Lund  Ward,  Nevada  Stake,  Nevada, 
from  1902  to  1910,  was  born  April  17, 
1869,  in  Pine  Valley,  Utah,  a  son  of 
William  Snow  and  Anna  Rogers.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  23,  1877,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1891- 
1893,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  13,  1902,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith. 

SWALLOW,  Richard  Thomas,  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Nevada  Stake 
presidency,  Nevada,  from  1926  to  1930, 
was  born  April  10,  1880,  in  Shoshone, 
Nevada,  the  son  of  George  Swallow 
and  Annie  Day.  He  was  baptized  in 
March,  1904,  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1905-1906,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  the  Nevada  Stake  presi- 
dency Sept.  19,  1926,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

WHITEHEAD,  Adolphus  R  e  n  i  e, 
jun..  Bishop  of  the  Lund  Ward,  Nevada 
Stake,  Nevada,  from  1910  to  1922,  was 
born  Jan.  4,  1868,  in  Washington, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Adolphus  R.  White- 
head and  Mary  Goddard.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  15,  1877,  ordained  a  Seventy 
April  7,  1897,  by  Brigham  H.  Roberts, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1897-1899,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  13,  1902,  by  Anthon  H. 
Lund,  and  a  Bishop  June  9,  1910,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 


548 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


North  Davis  Stake 

ADAMS,  Marion  F.,  Bishop  of  the 
Layton  Ward,  North  Davis  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1915,  was  born 
April  5,  1869,  in  Kaysville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Geo.  W.  Adams  and  Mary  Ann 
Pilling.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  25,  1910,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

DEESLEY,  Robert  Heber,  Bishop  of 
the  Sunset  Ward,  North  Davis  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1917,  was  born  Nov.  15,  1865, 
in  Kaysville,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
Beesley  and  Hannah  Flint.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  2,  1875,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  18,  1916,  by  David  O. 
McKay,  and  a  Bishop  Jan.  21,  1917,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant.  He  died  June  24,  1917. 

BLOOD,  Heber  Colemere,  Bishop  of 
the  Clearfield  Ward,  Nox-th  Davis 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1915  to  1917,  was 
born  Oct.  20,  1873,  in  Kaysville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  William  Blood  and  Sarah 
J.  Colemere.  He  was  baptized  May  21, 
1882,  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  6,  1895, 
by  Brigham  H.  Roberts,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1895-1898.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  27,  1910,  by  Joseph  H. 
Grant,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  5,  1915,  by 
Francis  M.  Ly-man. 

CALL,  Irvin,  Bishop  of  the  West 
Layton  Ward,  North  Davis  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  9,  1892,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  the 
son  of  David  Call  and  Eliza  Ditmore. 
He  was  baptized  April  23,  1901,  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1914- 
191G,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
12,  1923,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards,  and 
a  Bishop  Aug.  19,  1924,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

COOK,  Amos  Roy,  Bishop  of  the 
West  Point  (South  Hooper)  Ward, 
North  Davis  Stake,  Utah,  from  1927 
to  1930 -f,  was  born  Aug.  17,  1885,  at 
Bountiful,  Utah,  the  son  of  David  Cook 


and  Hannah  Holt.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  20, 1893,  and  after  being  ordained 
a  Seventy  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1913-1914.  He  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  May  25,  1919,  by 
Francis  H.  Nalder,  and  a  Bishop  Nov. 
13,  1927,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

ELLISON,   James   Edward,   Bishop 

of  the  Layton  Ward,  North  Davis 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1915  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  9,  1873,  in  Kaysville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Ephraim  P.  Ellison  and  Eliza- 
beth Whitesides.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  5,  1883,  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1906-1908,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  1,  1915,  by  David 
F.  Fawns,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  8,  1915, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

ENSIGN,  George  Calvin,  Bishop  of 

the  Sunset  Ward,  North  Davis  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  22,  1887,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Datus  H.  Ensign  and  Wealthy  Rich- 
ards. He  was  baptized  Oct.  25,  1895, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  29,  1926,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

GWILLIAM,  Henry  Beynon,  Bishop 

of  the  West  Point  (South  Hooper) 
Ward,  North  Davis  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1877  to  1883,  was  born  May  7,  1835, 
in  Shrewbury,  England.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July 
24,  1877,  by  Franklin  D.  Richards,  and 
died  Sept.  22,  1907,  in  Hooper,  Utah. 

HADLOCK,  Orlando  Bowen,  Bishop 
of  the  Sunset  Ward,  North  Davis 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1926,  was 
born  Jan.  15,  1889,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Orlando  D.  Hadlock  and  Esther 
M.  Parker.  He  was  baptized  July  4, 
1897,  filled  a  mission  to  Germany  in 
1911-1914,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  9,  1915,  by  David  O.  McKay, 
and  a  Bishop  Jan.  21,  1917,  by  Heber 
J.  Gi'ant. 

HARRIS,  Daniel  Browett,  Bishop  of 
the  Layton  Ward,  North  Davis  Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


549 


Utah,  from  1889  to  1910,  was  born 
Oct.  30,  1848,  in  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa, 
the  son  of  Robert  H.  Harris  and  Han- 
nah M.  Eagles.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  came  to  the  Valley  in 
1850,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  9,  1889,  by  Geo.  Q. 
Cannon. 

JACOBS,  Briant  Stringham,  Bishop 
of  the  Clearfield  Ward,  North  Davis 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930  + ,  was 
born  Oct,  4,  1886,  in  Sugar  House, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Henry  Chariton  Ja- 
cobs and  Susan  Stringham.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  14,  1894,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  25,  1925,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

KAY,  William,  jun..  Bishop  of  the 
Kaysville  Ward,  North  Davis  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1851  to  1856,  was  born 
April  11,  1811,  in  Chaigley,  Lanca- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  William 
Kay  and  Elizabeth  Mercer.  He  was 
baptized  in  August,  1837,  labored  as  a 
missionary  in  England,  and  came  to 
America  in  1844,  and  to  Utah  in  1848. 
He  was  appointed  to  preside  over 
what  is  now  Kaysville  Jan.  28,  1851, 
by  Brigham  Young.  He  died  March 
25,  1875. 

MILLER,  Arnold  David,  second 
counselor  in  the  North  Davis  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930  + , 
was  born  Oct.  12,  1879,  in  Farmington, 
Utah,  the  son  of  William  Henry  Miller 
and  Helen  Aurelia  Hinman.  -He  was 
baptized  Dec.  5,  1889,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1902-1904, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
5,  1909,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a 
Bishop  Aug.  2,  1915,  to  preside  over 
the  Syracuse  Ward.  He  was  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  in  the  Stake  pres- 
idency May  15,  1927,  by  Pres.  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

PARKER,  Edwin,  Bishop  of  the 
South  Hooper  (West  Point)  Ward, 
North  Davis  Stake,  Utah,  from  1883 


to  1893,  was  born  May  1,  1843,  in  Pres- 
ton, Hampshire,  England,  the  son  of 
William  Parker  and  Maria  Blake.  He 
was  baptized  April  15,  1855,  came  to 
the  Valley  in  1861,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Dec.  29,  1883,  by  Geo.  Q.  Can- 
non.   He  died  at  Hooper  Oct.  18,  1935. 

SCOFIELD,  Richard,  Bishop  of  the 
West  L  a  y  t  0  n  Ward,  North  Davis 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1924,  was 
born  Aug.  16,  1871,  in  Harlaxton,  Lin- 
colnshire, England,  the  son  of  George 
Scofield  and  Jane  Barsby.  He  was 
baptized  in  1883,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  24,  1919,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 


North  Sanpete  Stake 

ALLRED,  James  Anderson,  Bishop 
of  the  Spring  City  Ward,  North  San- 
pete Stake,  Utah,  from  1882  to  1904, 
was  born  Nov.  22,  1819,  in  Bedford 
County,  Tenn.,  a  son  of  William  Allred 
and  Sarah  Warren.  He  was  baptized  in 
1839,  came  to  Utah  in  1861,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  17,  1868, 
by  James  Allred,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  3, 
1882,  by  John  Henry  Smith.  He  died 
April  3,  1904. 

JONES,  James  Naylor,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Fairview  Branch,  North 
Sanpete  Stake,  Utah,  from  1859  to 
1864,  was  born  April  9,  1810,  in  Mary- 
land, a  son  of  Thomas  Jones  and  Mary 
Naylor.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1848, 
and  was  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder 
by  Welcome  Chapman  in  1861.  He 
died  Aug.  14,  1865. 

LARSEN,  Lauritz  Orson,  Bishop  of 
the  Spring  City  Ward,  North  Sanpete 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1904  to  1913,  was 
born  Feb.  7,  1868,  in  Spring  City,  a 
son  of  Lauritz  Lai'sen  and  Louisa  Jes- 
persen.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  Mission  in  1897-1900, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  11,  1904,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 


550 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


MADSEN,  Niels  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Mt.  Pleasant  North  Ward,  North 
Sanpete  Stake,  Utah,  tVom  1878  to 
1890,  was  born  Sept.  17,  1832,  in  Svin- 
ning-e,  Sjaelland,  Denmark,  a  son  of 
Lars  Madsen  and  Bodel  Nielsen.  He 
was  baptized  Dec.  2,  1854,  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1856,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  20,  1878, 
by  Erastus  Snow.  He  died  Sept.  30, 
1909,  in  Mt.  Pleasant. 

NIELSEN,  Niels  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Fairview  South  Ward,  North  San- 
pete Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  17,  1876,  in  Fairview,  a 
son  of  Niels  Nielsen  and  Christine 
Christiansen.     He  was  baptized  June 

22,  1884,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  16,  1924,  by 
Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

OLSEN,  Frederik,  Bishop  of  the 
Spring  City  Ward,  North  Sanpete 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1868  to  1882,  was 
born  July  26,  1824,  in  Kjolby,  Den- 
mark, a  son  of  Ole  Hansen  and  Bertha 
Olsen.  He  was  baptized  in  1854,  came 
to  Utah  in  1857  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  May  2,  1868,  by  Orson  Hyde. 
He  died  Sept.  2,  1920.  (See  also  Emery 
Stake.) 

PETERSON,    Andre  w    Lysander, 

Bishop  of  the  Mt.  Pleasant  South 
Ward,  North  Sanpete  Stake,  Utah, 
from   1926  to   1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec. 

23,  1887,  in  Fairview,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Peter  Peterson  and  Celestia  M.  Terry. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  24,  1923,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards, 
and  was  chosen  and  sustained  as  Bish- 
op in  March,  1926. 

PETERSEN,  Louis  A.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  North  Sanpete  Stake  pres- 
idency, Utah,  from  1923  to  1926,  was 
born  May  21,  1889,  in  Fountain  Green, 
Utah,  a  son  of  George  P.  Petersen 
and  Anne  Madsen.  He  was  baptized 
June   8,   1897,   was   ordained   a   High 


Priest  Dec.  14,  1919,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun.,  and  was  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency 
April  1,  1923,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

SEELEY,  Justin  Burt,  Bishop  of 
the  Mt.  Pleasant  North  Ward,  North 
Sanpete  Stake,  Utah,  from  1909  to 
1911,  was  born  April  14,  1882,  in  In- 
dianola,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  H. 
Seeley  and  Charlotte  Reynolds.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  12,  1909,  by  John  Henry 
Smith. 

SPENCER,  John,  Bishop  of  the  In- 
dianola  Ward,  North  Sanpete  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1881  to  1890,  was  born 
Aug.  29,  1836,  in  Lancashire,  England, 
a  son  of  Richai-d  Spencer  and  Mary 
Enshaw.  He  was  baptized  when  elev- 
en years  old  in  Pottawattamie  County, 
Iowa,  came  to  Utah  in  1852,  was  called 
to  preside  over  the  Indian  Mission  in 
Skull  Valley  in  1877,  and  baptized 
many  Indians.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Pres.  John  Taylor,  and  died 
March  29,  1922. 

TUCKER,  Amasa,  Bishop  of  the 
Fairview  Ward,  North  Sanpete  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1866  to  1889,  was  born 
Oct.  22,  1833,  in  Connecticut,  a  son  of 
James  Tucker  and  Nancy  Joy.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Aug.  6,  1866,  by  Orson  Hyde.  He 
died  Aug.  12,  1906. 

VANCE,  Byron  Alvin,  Bishop  of  the 
Milburn  Ward,  North  Sanpete  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1918  to  1924,  was  born 
Oct.  31,  1887,  in  Fairview,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Geo.  H.  Vance  and  Mary  Wake- 
field. He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  15,  1918,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


551 


North  Sevier  Stake 

BIRD,  Kelsey  Walter,  Bishop  of  the 
Salina  1st  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1916,  was  born 
March  10,  1868,  in  Mendon,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Kelsey  Bird  and  Ann  Muir.  He 
was  baptized  in  1877,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1908-1910,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  23,  1912,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

BURR,  Gilbert  Morse,  Bishop  of  the 
Salina  2nd  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  10,  1881,  in  Glenwood,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Henry  Uriah  Burr  and  Julia 
Caroline  Beal.  He  was  baptized  in 
1890,  and,  after  being  ordained  an  Eld- 
er, he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1903-1906.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Jan.  30,  1921,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop  Jan.  15, 
1922,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

DURFEE,  Jabez,  Bishop  of  the  Au- 
rora Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1881  to  1883,  was  born  May  10, 
1828,  in  Williams,  Oswego  Co.,  N.  Y., 
a  son  of  Edmund  Durfee  and  Lancy 
Pickle.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  August,  1880,  by  Albert  K.  Thurber, 
and  a  Bishop  Feb.  27,  1881.  He  died 
Dec.  27,  1883. 

FRANDSEN,  James  Ernest,  Bishop 
of  the  Redmond  Ward,  North  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1924,  was 
born  Dec.  12,  1887,  in  Redmond,  Utah, 
a  son  of  James  Frandsen  and  Marinda 
Snow.  He  was  baptized  when  nine 
years  old,  and  after  being  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Wm.  H.  Seegmiller  in  1906, 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1906-1908.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  17,  1921,  by 
Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

GLEDHILL,  John  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Vermillion  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1903  to  1907,  was  ordained 
a    High    Priest    March    25,    1900,    by 


Francis  M.  Lyman.     He  died  Aug.  1, 
1917,  at  Richfield,  Utah. 

GOTTFREDSEN,  Jacob,  Bishop  of 
the  Vermillion  Ward,  North  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1899  to  1903,  was 
born  Dec.  3,  1862,  in  Mt.  Pleasant, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Jens  Gottfredsen  and 
Kai-en  Marie  Pedersen.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  2,  1896,  by 
John  Henry  Smith. 

HANSEN,  Delbert,  Bishop  of  the 
Redmond  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1928,  was  born 
March  25,  1890,  in  Radmond,  the  son 
of  James  Hansen  and  Elizabeth  Frand- 
sen. He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  ordained  an  Elder  in  June,  1920, 
by  James  A.  Christensen  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Central  States  in  1920- 
1922.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Jan.  20,  1924,  by  Hyrum 
G.  Smith. 

JENSEN,  Elijah  Martin,  Bishop  of 
the  Vermillion  Ward,  North  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1919,  was 
born  March  27,  1880,  in  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah,  the  son  of  James  C.  Jen- 
sen and  Annie  Jessie  Jepson.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  14,  1888,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1904- 
1906,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  12,  1913,  by  John  Christensen, 
and  a  Bishop  Sept.  22,  1917,  by  James 
E.  Talmage. 

JENSEN,  Jens,  Bishop  of  the  Sa- 
lina Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1879  to  1887,  was  born  April  18, 
1830,  at  Nim,  near  Horsens,  Jutland, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Jens  Pedersen 
and  Ane  Jensen.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  30,  1852,  emigrated  to  Utah,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  17,  1880,  by  Albert  Carrington, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1888-1890.     He  died  April  24,  1906. 

JENSEN.  Martin,  Bishop  of  the 
Redmond  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from   1901   to    1912,  was   born 


552 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Jan.  7,  1866,  at  Gunnison,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Christian  Jensen  and  Barbara 
Christensen.  He  was  baptized  in  1878, 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  18,  1898,  by 
Chr.  D.  Fjeldsted,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  Denmark  in  1898-1900.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
29,  1902,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith. 

JOHNSON,  Carl  Erik,  Bishop  of  the 
Salina  2nd  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1922,  was  born 
Oct.  27,  1871,  in  Sweden,  the  son  of 
Carl  Erik  Johnson  and  Sophia  Person. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  25,  1887,  filled 
a  mission  to  Sweden  in  1901-1904,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March  24, 
1912,  by  Robert  D.  Young.  He  died  in 
February,  1922, 

JOHNSON,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Redmond  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1887,  was  born  in 
Nordborg,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Jens  Jo- 
hansen  and  Sine  Thorsen.  He  was 
baptized  April  8,  1854,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Feb.  19,  1877,  by  Orson 
Hyde,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  25,  1877,  by 
Albert  K.  Thurber. 

LAZENBY,  Moroni,  president  of 
the  North  Sevier  Stake  of  Zion,  Utah, 
from  1921  to  1924,  was  born  Jan.  12, 
1872,  in  Minersville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  Thomas  Lazenby  and  Anna  Teth- 
er. He  was  baptized  when  nine  years 
old,  filled  a  mission  to  Australasia  in 
1894-1897,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  North  Sevier 
Stake  Jan.  20,  1921,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

MATTSON,  Carl  Albert,  Bishop  of 
the  Salina  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1904  to  1908,  was  born 
Sept.  2,  1876,  in  Tierp,  Upsala  Ian, 
Sweden,  the  son  of  Jonas  Mattson  and 
Mariah  C.  Larson.  He  came  to  Utah 
in  1880,  was  baptized  Oct.  5,  1884, 
ordained  a  Seventy  July  10,  1900,  by 
J.  Golden  Kimball,  filled  a  mission  to 


Sweden  in  1900-1902,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan. 
18,  1904,  by  Geo.  Teasdale. 

PAYNE,    Claude    Brigham,    Bishop 

of  the  Vermillion  Ward,  North  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  5,  1878,  in  Glenwood, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Edward  Payne  and 
Emma  Powell.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
7,  1886,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  18,  1926,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

PETERSEN,  Conrad  Erastus,  Bish- 
op of  the  Salina  1st  Ward,  North  Se- 
vier Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Aug.  2,  1892,  in  Redmond, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Erastus  Peter  Petersen. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  30,  1900,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Dec.  27,  1919,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards. 

PETERSEN,  Orrin  Franklin,  Bish- 
op of  the  Redmond  Ward,  North  Se- 
vier Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930, 
was  born  April  3,  1904,  in  Redmond,  a 
son  of  Joseph  F.  Petersen  and  Joseph- 
ine Frandsen.  He  was  baptized  June 
18,  1912,  ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  25, 
1922,  by  Ira  M.  Jensen,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northwestern  States  in 
1922-1924,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  14,  1928,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

PETERSON,  Joseph  Franklin,  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  North  Sevier 
Stake  presidency,  Utah,  from  1924  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  July  16,  1879,  in 
Ephraim,  Utah,  a  son  of  Niels  Peter 
Peterson  and  Annie  Christine  Peter- 
sen. He  was  baptized  June  5,  1888, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  23, 1912, 
and  set  apart  April  20,  1924,  as  second 
counselor  in  the  stake  presidency,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

RASMUSSEN,  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Salina  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1804  to  1867,  was  born 
Dec.  31,  1835,  in  Thorslunde,  Holbak 
amt,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Rasmus  Ras- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


563 


mussen  and  Katrine  Andersen.  He 
was  baptized  March  19,  1852,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1853,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
12,  1864,  by  Orson  Hyde.  He  died 
Feb.  7,  1926. 

SORENSEN,  Levi,  Bishop  of  the 
Aurora  Ward,  North  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  16,  1889,  in  Aurora,  a  son  of 
Hans  Sorensen  and  Matilda  Torgen- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1897, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1912-1914,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  21,  1919,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

THALMAN,  Albert  Verge,  Bishop 
of  the  Vermillion  Ward,  North  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1926,  was 
born  Nov.  17,  1893,  in  Vermillion,  the 
son  of  John  Jacob  Thalman  and  Eliza- 
beth A,  Gledhill.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  10,  1903,  ordained  an  Elder  Nov. 
17,  1913,  by  H.  H.  Bell,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northwestern  States  Mission  in 
1913-1916,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  20,  1919,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

THORNELL,  Jesse,  second  counsel- 
or in  the  North  Sevier  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1921  to  1924,  was 
born  Oct.  10,  1878,  in  Newpoint,  Mo., 
the  son  of  James  Thornell  and  Martha 
Dyke.  He  was  baptized  in  August, 
1901,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  20,  1919,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards and  presided  over  the  Salina  2nd 
Ward  until  Jan.  30,  1921,  when  he  was 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 


North  Weber  Stake 

ALLRED,  John  Allen,  Bishop  of  the 
Slaterville  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1890,  was  born 
Aug.  29,  1834,  in  Monroe  Co.,  Mo.,  a 
son   of   Isaac   Allred   and   Julia  Ann 


Taylor.  He  was  baptized  in  October, 
1842,  came  to  Utah  in  1851,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  28,  1877,  by  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ards.   He  died  April  9,  1904. 

BALLANTYNE,  Zachariah,  Bishop 
of  the  West  WeberWard,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1888  to  1893,  was 
born  Oct.  13,  1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Richard  Ballantyne 
and  Mary  Pearce.  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  by  Franklin  D.  Richards. 

BINGHAM,  Edwin  Aldous,  Bishop 
of  the  Wilson  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1908  to  1920,  was 
born  Aug.  31,  1864,  in  Bingham  Fort 
(Lynne),  Utah,  the  son  of  Brigham 
H.  Bingham  and  Angeline  T.  Aldous. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1875,  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1902- 
1905,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
8,  1906,  by  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff,  and  a 
Bishop  Aug.  11,  1908,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

BRAMWELL,  George  Walter,  jun.. 

Bishop  of  the  Plain  City  Ward,  North 
Weber  Stake,  Utah,  from  1883  to  1906, 
was  born  Dec.  19,  1853,  in  Portsmouth, 
England,  the  son  of  George  Bramwell 
and  Mary  Ann  Stevenson.  He  was 
baptized  in  1864,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1869,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1882,  being  released  early  on 
account  of  illness.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  22, 1883. 

BROWN,   Richard   Roy   Daniels, 

Bishop  of  the  Harrisville  Ward,  North 
Weber  Stake,  Utah,  from  1913  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  May  10,  1887,  in 
Harrisville,  Utah,  the  son  of  Richard 
V.  Brown  and  Lucy  Ann  Enslow 
(Fields).  He  was  baptized  June  17, 
1883,  ordained  a  Seventy  March  10, 
1897,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Central  States  in  1897- 
1899,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
21,  1908,  by  David  A.  Smith,  and  a 
Bishop  Aug.  26,  1913,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 


554 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


DANA,  Charles  Roswell,  Bishop  of 
the  Ogden  16th  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1923,  was 
born  March  10,  1887,  in  Ogden,  a  son 
of  Chauncey  R.  Dana  and  Mary  Ellen 
Clark.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  27,  1905, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  10,  1917, 
by  Charles  Wotherspoon  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Oct.  14,  1917,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

DOUGLASS,  Richard,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  West  Weber  Branch, 
North  Weber  Stake,  Utah,  from  1864 
to  1867,  was  born  Feb.  27,  1828,  in 
Downham,  Lancashire,  England,  a  son 
of  George  Douglass  and  Ellen  Briggs. 
He  emigrated  to  Amei'ica  in  1842, 
came  to  Utah  in  1852,  and  was  ap- 
pointed presiding  Elder  in  1864.  He 
died  Feb.  16,  1914. 

DURRANT,  Stephen  Thomas,  jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Ogden  10th  Ward,  North 
Weber  Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1929, 
was  born  July  24,  1876,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Stephen  T.  Dur- 
rant  and  Frances  Ann  Rowley.  He 
was  baptized  in  April,  1886,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
31,  1925,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

ETHERINGTON,    George    William, 

Bishop  of  the  West  Weber  Ward, 
North  Weber  Stake,  Utah,  from  1910 
to  1916,  was  born  Oct.  31,  1879,  in 
West  Weber,  a  son  of  Thomas  Ether- 
ington  and  Sarah  Wheeler.  He  was 
baptized  July  15,  1888,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  March  14,  1909,  by 
James  Weatherspoon,  and  a  Bishop 
March  27,  1910,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

FARR,  Winslow,  jun..  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden  3rd  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1891,  was  born 
May  11,  1837,  in  Vermont,  a  son  of 
Winslow  Farr  and  Olive  H.  Freeman, 
ile  was  baptized  May  11,  1845,  and 
v-ars  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op May  28,  1877,  by  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ardH.     He  died  Feb.  18,  1913. 


GIBSON,  James  Jardine,  Bishop  of 
the  Taylor  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 -f,  was  born 
March  21,  1880,  in  West  Weber,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Jacob  Gibson  and  Mary  Jar- 
dine.  He  was  baptized  June  10,  1888, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  29,  1905,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1908-1910,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  11,  1921,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards, 
and  a  Bishop  March  14,  1926,  by  David 
O.  McKay. 

GIBSON,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Og- 
den 16th  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
May  9,  1884,  in  West  Weber,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Thomas  Gibson  and  Cather- 
ine Hunter.  He  was  baptized  July  7, 
1892,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  5,  1926,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

HADFIELD,  John,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Grouse  Creek  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  15,  1883,  at  Glossop,  Derby- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  John  Hadfield 
and  Mary  Shaw.  He  was  baptized  in 
August,  1900,  and  came  to  Utah  that 
same  year.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1909-1911,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  24,  1916, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop 
June  5,  1927,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

HILL,  William,  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Ogden  3rd  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1863  to  1864,  was 
born  March  13,  1826,  in  Leicester, 
England,  a  son  of  Nathaniel  Hill  and 
Sarah  Horspool.  He  was  baptized 
March  31,  1851,  and  appointed  presid- 
ing Elder  Oct.  25,  1863.  He  died  Dec. 
4,  1864. 

HUGGINS,  Ira  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden  10th  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  8,  1898,  in  Fountain  Green, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Geo.  W.  Huggins  and 
Kjersten  Hansen,     He   was   baptized 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


655 


July  30,  1906,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  May,  1928,  by  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney, and  a  Bishop  Dec.  1,  1929,  by 
James  E.  Tahnage. 

HUNTER.  William  Coutts,  Bishop 
of  the  West  Weber  Ward,  North  We- 
ber Stake,  Utah,  from  1909  to  1910, 
was  born  Jan.  21,  1861,  in  Muirhouse, 
Scotland,  a  son  of  James  F.  Hunter 
and  Christine  Coutts.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  5,  1869,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  and  the  Eastern  States 
in  1892-1894,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  14,  1909,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

IRVINE,  Thomas  Maycock,  second 
counselor  in  the  North  Weber  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  July  26,  1885,  in  Payson, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  D.  Irvine  and 
Louise  Marie  Maycock.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  3,  1893,  filled  a  mission  to 
California  in  1916-1918,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  1,  1908,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  sustained  as 
second  counselor  in  the  North  Weber 
Stake  presidency  Sept.  11,  1921.  He 
was  pi-omoted  to  first  counselor  in 
1931. 

JARDINE,  William  Hamilton,  Bish- 
op of  the  Taylor  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1909  to  1926,  was 
born  Feb.  11,  1865,  in  Wellsville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  James  Jardine  and  Isabel 
White.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  2,  1873, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
31,  1908,  by  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff,  and  a 
Bishop  by  Orson  F.  Whitney  March 
14,  1909. 

KIMBER,  Charles,  sen.,  Bishop  of 
the  Grouse  Creek  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1880  to  1895,  was 
born  Aug.  31,  1818,  in  Berkshire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  James  Kimber  and  Anna 
Piggott.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  5, 1845, 
came  to  Utah  in  1868,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Sept.  15,  1880,  by 
Oliver  G.  Snow. 


LEE,  Earl  E.,  Bishop  of  the  Ogden 
15th  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept. 
2,  1896,  in  Ogden,  a  son  of  Thomas 
Lee  and  Elizabeth  A.  Butterworth.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  8,  1904,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  14,  1920, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  a  Bishop 
March  14,  1926,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

MARRIOTT,  Moroni  Stewart,  Bish- 
op of  the  Marriott  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1902  to  1908,  was 
born  Oct.  31,  1857,  in  Marriott,  a  son 
of  John  Marriott  and  Elizabeth  Stew- 
art. He  was  baptized  Aug.  2,  1866, 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  in 
1885-1888,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  25,  1902,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith. 

MARTIN,  James,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Farr  West  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1898  to  1909,  was 
born  June  7,  1846,  in  Princess  Rock, 
Devonshire,  England,  a  son  of  James 
Martin  and  Mary  Ann  Stockdale.  He 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1861,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  6,  1890,  by 
Charles  F.  Middleton,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  July  24,  1898,  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards.    He  died  Jan.  19,  1931. 

MAW,  Henry  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Plain  City  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1913,  was  born 
Feb.  12,  1870,  in  Plain  City,  a  son  of 
Abraham  Maw  and  Eliza  Tripp.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  24,  1879,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Central  States  in  1905- 
1907,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  25,  1910,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

MAW,  Wilmer  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Plain  City  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1926,  was  born 
Jan.  17,  1892,  in  Plain  City,  the  son 
of  John  Maw  and  Annie  C.  Poulsen. 
He  was  baptized  July  1,  1900,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Nov.  18,  1914,  by  J. 
Golden    Kimball,   filled   a   mission   to 


556 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


New  Zealand  in  1914-1919,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  28,  1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

McENTIRE,  William  F.,  Bishop  of 
the  Farr  West  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1892  to  1897,  was 
born  Oct.  31,  1834,  in  Halifax  County, 
Virginia,  a  son  of  John  A.  McEntire 
and  Elizabeth  Dean.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  21,  1868,  came  to  Utah  that 
year,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  3,  1892,  by  Franklin 
D.  Richards.  He  died  Nov.  30,  1897, 
at  Farr  West. 

McFARLAND,  Archibald,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  West  Weber  Branch, 
North  Weber  Stake,  Utah,  from  1867 
to  1872,  was  born  Dec.  17,  1832,  in 
Dysart,  Fifeshire,  Scotland,  a  son  of 
William  McFarland  and  Margaret  Mc- 
Cormack.  He  was  baptized  April  29, 
1843,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1855,  and 
filled  two  missions  to  his  native  land, 
one  in  1873-1875.  He  was  appointed 
presiding  Elder  in  February,  1867,  by 
Bishop  Chauncey  W.  West,  and  died 
Dec.  14,  1915. 

McFARLAND,  Robert,  Bishop  of 
the  West  Weber  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1892  to  1909,  was 
born  Sept.  19,  1844,  in  Berland,  Fife- 
shire, Scotland,  a  son  of  William  Mc- 
Farland and  Margaret  McCormack. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  12,  1854,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  May  16,  1869,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Scotland  in  1881- 
1882.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  June,  1888,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  12, 
1892,  by  Franklin  D.  Richards.  He 
died  July  2,  1931. 

PALMER,  George  Arthur,  Bishop 
of  the  Plain  City  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  March  11,  1873,  in  Plain  City,  a 
son  of  Edward  Jonathan  Palmer  and 
Caroline  Florence  Barker.  He  was 
baptized  in  1900,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in   1914-1916,  was  or- 


dained a  High  Priest  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard in  1920,  and  a  Bishop  March  14, 
1926,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

PETERSON,  Carl  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden  3rd  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1911,  was  born 
July  2,  1853,  in  Dalsland,  Sweden,  a 
son  of  Pehr  J.  Peterson  and  Christina 
Johanson.  He  was  baptized  March  23, 
1873,  was  ordained  a  Seventy,  filled 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1888-1890, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  27, 
1908. 

PLATT,  James  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Wilson  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1930,  was  born 
June  25,  1886,  in  Patterson,  New  Jer- 
sey, a  son  of  Benjamin  Piatt  and  Mary 
Ellen  Otterway.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
4,  1895,  ordained  an  Elder  by  Joseph 
H.  Grant  Oct.  10,  1906,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1906-1909. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
1,  1917,  by  Francis  W.  Stratford,  and 
a  Bishop  June  20,  1920,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

POWELL,  Thomas  Ezra,  Bishop  of 
the  Marriott  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1908  to  1918,  was 
born  May  2,  1875,  in  Marriott,  a  son 
of  John  Davis  Powell  and  Sarah  Joyce. 
He  was  baptized  July  3,  1884,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Oct.  18,  1908,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

RACKHAM,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Wilson  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1891  to  1906,  was  born 
Nov.  8,  1826,  in  Weston,  Suffolk,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  John  Rackham  and 
Elizabeth  Howard.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  3,  1849,  labored  a  short  time  as 
a  missionary  in  England,  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1869,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  5,  1891, 
by  Franklin  D.  Richards. 

RICH,  James  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Slaterville  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


557 


Utah,  from  1922  to  1927,  was  born 
April  2,  1882,  in  Richville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  James  T.  Rich  and  Emma  Hem- 
ming. He  was  baptized  April  13,  1890, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  15,  1913, 
by  James  Wotherspoon,  and  a  Bishop 
by  Rudger   Clawson   April   1,   1923. 

RITCHIE,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Marriott  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1902,  was  born 
May  12,  1833,  in  Saltcoats,  Ayrshire, 
Scotland,  a  son  of  James  Ritchie  and 
Elizabeth  Anderson.  He  was  baptized 
in  Salt  Lake  City  when  twenty-one 
years  old,  having  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1853.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1885-1886,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  May  28,  1877,  by  John  Tay- 
lor.    He  died  June  6,  1913. 


a  son  of  James  A.  Slater  and  Mary  E. 
Allred.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  16,  1897, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1910-1912,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  April,  1923,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  and  a  Bishop  June  3,  1928,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

SLATER,  James  Alma,  Bishop  of 
the  Slaterville  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1899  to  1922,  was 
born  April  11,  1856,  at  Slaterville,  a 
son  of  Richard  Slater  and  Ann  Cor- 
bridge.  He  was  baptized  June  6,  1867, 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  the  spring 
of  1884  and  filled  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand  in  1884-1887.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Oct.  2,  1892,  by  Lewis 
W.  Shurtliff,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  19, 
1899.     He  died  March  4,  1934. 


RITCHIE,  Lawrence,  Bishop  of  the 
Marriott  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1930,  was  born 
Sept.  30,  1880,  in  Marriott,  a  son  of 
James  Ritchie  and  Hannah  Bright.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1890,  ordained 
an  Elder  May  24,  1903,  by  Timothy  P. 
Terry,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Brit- 
ain in  1903-1905,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  20,  1919, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

SKEEN,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the  War- 
ren Ward,  North  Weber  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  April 
29,  1876,  in  Plain  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Lyman  S.  Skeen  and  Electa  P.  Dixon. 
He  was  baptized  July  3,  1884,  and 
after  being  ordained  a  Seventy  June 
16,  1897,  by  Brigham  H.  Roberts,  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1897-1899.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  12,  1909,  by  John  V.  Bluth, 
and  a  Bishop  June  21,  1925,  by  Reed 
Smoot. 

SLATER,  Enos  Arnold,  Bishop  of 
the  Slaterville  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  16,  1889,  at  Slaterville, 


STEWART,  William  Lyle,  Bishop  of 
the  Warren  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1896  to  1908,  was  born 
Nov.  19,  1846,  in  Glasgow,  Scotland, 
a  son  of  Archibald  Stewart  and  Esther 
Lyle.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1854, 
was  baptized  in  1854,  filled  a  mission 
to  Scotland  in  1888-1890,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
10,  1896,  by  Geo.  Q.  Cannon.  He  died 
March  15,  1917. 

TAYLOR,  Lorenzo,  Bishop  of  the 
Farr  West  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930+ ,  was  born 
Sept.  16,  1885,  at  Harrisville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Joseph  Allen  Taylor  and  Mary 
Lake.  He  was  baptized  July  5,  1894, 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  4,  1904, 
by  James  Martin,  filled  a  mission  to 
Hawaii  in  1904-1908,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  3,  1928, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

TAYLOR,  Pleasant  Green,  Bishop 
of  the  Harrisville  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1895,  was 
born  Feb.  8,  1827,  in  Bowling  Green, 
Kentucky,  a  son  of  William  Taylor  and 
Elizabeth  Patrick.     He  was  baptized 


558 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


in  1837,  came  to  Utah  in  1850,  filled 
a  mission  to  Kentucky  in  1869-1870, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  28, 
1877,  by  John  Taylor.  He  died  May 
16,  1917. 

TERRY,  Timothy  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Ogden  10th  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1913  to  1925,  was 
born  Nov.  17,  1858,  at  Wilson,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Peter  Hartswell  Terry  and 
Esther  A.  Hadlock.  He  was  baptized 
July  2,  1868,  and  after  being  ordained 
a  Seventy  he  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1893-1895.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  by  Nils  C.  Flygare,  and 
a  Bishop  March  30,  1913,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman. 

THATCHER,  Gilbert,  Bishop  of  the 
Plain  City  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1913  to  1920,  was  born 
April  16,  1876,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a  son 
of  John  B.  Thatcher  and  Rachel  Davis. 
He  was  baptized  May  6,  1886,  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1902,  and  was  sustained  as 
Bishop  April   13,   1913. 

THOMAS,  Daniel  Francis,  Bishop 
of  the  Lynne  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1875  to  1890,  was 
born  April  13,  1826,  in  Caermarthen- 
shire,  Wales,  a  son  of  Daniel  Thomas 
and  Hannah  Williams.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  16,  1847,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1885,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  May  29,  1877,  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards.  He  died  July  3,  1890,  at 
Lynne,  Utah. 

TURNQUIST,  Carl  Oscar,  Bishop 
of  the  Lynne  Ward,  North  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1908  to  1916,  was 
born  April  25,  1880,  in  Karbenning, 
Westmanland,  Sweden,  a  son  of  Gus- 
taf  Turnquist  and  Mathilda  Hedberg. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  9,  1891,  after 
emigrating  to  Utah  in  June  of  the 
same  year,  was  ordained  an  Elder  Jan. 
1,  1905,  by  Geo.  Smuin,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1905-1907. 


He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 
22,  1907,  by  Nils  C.  Flygare,  and  a 
Bishop  Nov.  1,  1908,  by  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney. 

VAN   DYKE,   William   David,  jun.. 

Bishop  of  the  Ogden  3rd  Ward,  North 
Weber  Stake,  Utah,  from  1911  to 
1914,  was  born  Aug.  17,  1879,  in  Og- 
den, Utah,  the  son  of  William  D.  Van 
Dyke,  sen.,  and  Martha  Evans.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
in  1902-1904,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Jan.  1,  1911,  by  David  O.  McKay. 
He  died  May  22,  1914,  at  Ogden. 

WALKER,  Fredrick  William,  Bish- 
op of  the  Ogden  16th  Ward  (West 
Ogden),  North  Weber  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1915  to  1917,  was  born  Jan.  11, 
1872,  in  West  Weber,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Samuel  Walker  and  Sarah  Dixon.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1880,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan. 
10,   1915,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

WAYMENT,  William  T.,  Bishop  of 
the  Warren  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1925,  was  born 
April  29,  1858,  in  Whaddon,  Cam- 
bridge, England,  the  son  of  William 
Wayment  and  Martha  Brown.  He  was 
baptized  May  20,  1872,  emigrated  to 
Utah,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1897-1900,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  27, 
1908,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

WHITE,  Barnard,  Bishop  of  the  Og- 
den 3rd  Ward,  North  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1891  to  1901,  was  born 
Jan.  16,  1839,  in  London,  England,  the 
son  of  William  White  and  Mary  Ann 
Syer.  He  was  baptized  May  22,  1854, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1877,  and  a 
Bishop  Jan.  24,  1891,  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards.    He  died  March  8,  1912. 


Ogden  Stake 


BELNAP,  Arias  Guy,  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden  20th  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


559 


from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept. 
6,  1893,  in  Hooper,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Hyrum  Belnap  and  Anna  C.  Bluth.  He 
was  baptized  in  1901,  ordained  an 
Elder  in  1913,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Swiss-German  Mission  in  1913-1916, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  March  27,  1927,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

CLARK,  Parley  James,  Bishop  of 
the  Liberty  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug. 
19,  1893,  in  Liberty,  a  son  of  Andrew 
A.  Clark  and  Mary  Alice  Lindsay.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  30,  1902,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  13,  1923,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  23,  1930, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

DUNN,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
North  Ogden  Ward,  Ogden  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1851  to  1863,  was  born  Jan. 
2,  1822,  at  Phelps,  Ontario  Co.,  N.  Y., 
a  son  of  James  Dunn  and  Sally  Bark- 
er. He  was  baptized  May  28,  1839,  and 
came  to  Utah  in  1847,  as  one  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Dec.  22,  1852,  by  Lorin 
Farr,  and  a  Bishop  on  the  same  date 
by  Brigham  Young. 

EVANS,  Thomas  Benjamin,  presi- 
dent of  the  Ogden  Stake  of  Zion,  Utah, 
from  1908  to  1919,  was  born  Feb.  3, 
1859,  in  Trecynon,  Wales,  a  son  of 
Thomas  Evans  and  Mary  Benjamin. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  England  and 
Wales  in  1890-1892,  and  was  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  Ogden  Stake  July 

26,  1908,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards.    He  died 
April  4,  1919,  at  Ogden. 

FERRIN,  Arthur  Moroni,  Bishop  of 
the  Liberty  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1909  to  1918,  was  born  Dec.  10, 
1881,  in  Eden,  Utah,  a  son  of  Josiah 
L.  Ferrin  and  Ella  D.  Stallings.  He 
was  baptized  June  5,  1890,  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Aug.  22,  1907,  by 
Lewis  W.  Shurtliff,  and  a  Bishop  June 

27,  1909,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 


FOULGER,  Albert  Burton,  Bishop 
of  the  Ogden  6th  Ward,  Ogden  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1927,  was  born 
Sept.  26,  1883,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Fred.  Foulger  and  Isabella  Burton. 
He  was  baptized  June  5,  1892,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Jan.  30,  1917,  by 
David  O.  McKay,  and  a  Bishop  May 
19,  1921,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard, 

GROW,  John  Moyer,  Bishop  of  the 
Middleton  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June 
25,  1874,  in  Huntsville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  Wood  Grow  and  Katherine  Mc- 
Kay. He  was  baptized  Aug.  18,  1883, 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  1897  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Indian  Territory  in  1897-1899. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept. 
10,  1905,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund,  and  a 
Bishop  May  9,  1920,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

GWILLIAM,  Henry  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  Ogden  4th  Ward,  Ogden  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1908,  and  of  the  Ogden  6th 
Ward,  from  1908  to  1911,  was  born 
Feb.  21,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Henry  B.  Gwilliam  and  Eliza- 
beth Palmer.  He  was  baptized  in  May 
1865,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
29,  1887,  by  Franklin  D.  Richards,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  23,  1908,  by 
Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith.  He  died  Sept.  22, 
1907. 

HALLS,  John,  first  counselor  in  the 
Ogden  Stake  presidency,  Utah,  from 
1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  July  11,  1872, 
in  Huntsville,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
Halls  and  Louisa  C.  Enderby.  He  was 
baptized  May  10,  1881,  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.  28,  1908,  by  David  0.  Mc- 
Kay, and  presided  over  Huntsville 
Ward  from  1908  to  1916.  He  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  in  the  Ogden 
Stake  presidency  in  1918  and  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  May  11,  1919, 
by  David  O.  McKay. 

IIALVERSON,  Arthur,  Bishop  of 
the    Ogden   6th   Ward,    Ogden   Stake, 


560 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  27,  1880,  in  Marriott,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Simeon  Halverson  and  Inge- 
borg  Fredrickson.  He  was  baptized 
July  5,  1888,  ordained  an  Elder  in  May, 
1901,  by  James  Ritchie,  filled  a  mission 
to  Norway  in  1901-1903,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
15,  1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

JENSEN,  Henry  Lewis,  Bishop  of 
the  Pleasant  View  Ward,  Ogden  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Jan.  1,  1886,  in  Pleasant  View,  a  son 
of  James  Jensen  and  Sophia  Hansen. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  2,  1900,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  May  5,  1909,  by  J. 
Golden  Kimball,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1910-1912,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  17,  1914,  by 
Samuel  G.  Dye,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  17, 
1924,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

JUDKINS,  Joshua  Burton,  Bishop 
of  the  Liberty  Ward,  Ogden  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1892  to  1904,  was  born 
June  17,  1847,  in  Franklin  Co.,  Maine, 
a  son  of  Newell  Judkins  and  Rachel 
Hoyt.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  26,  1876, 
came  to  Utah  that  same  year,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  10,  1892,  by  Franklin  D.  Rich- 
ards.    He  died  Sept.  24,  1913. 

LUND,  Hyrum  Elmer,  Bishop  of  the 
Ogden  4th  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1919  to  1927,  was  born  Dec.  15, 
1883,  in  Plain  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Willard  R.  Lund  and  Bertha  Anderson. 
He  was  baptized  July  7,  1892,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Feb.  9,  1917,  by  David 
O.  McKay,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  10,  1919, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

McKAY,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Huntsville  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1885  to  1905,  was  born  May  3, 
1844,  in  Caithness  County,  near  Thur- 
.so,  Scotland,  a  son  of  Wm.  McKay  and 
Helen  Oman.  He  came  to  Utah  in 
1856,  and  filled  a  missionto  Scotland  in 
1881-1883,  presiding  over  that  Mission. 


He  was  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Huntsville  Ward  March  22,  1885.  He 
died  Nov.  10,  1917. 

PETERSEN,  Joseph  Lind,  Bishop  of 
the  Huntsville  Ward,  Ogden  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1916  to  1926,  was  bom 
July  15,  1876,  in  Huntsville,  a  son  of 
Soren  L.  and  Louisa  Petersen.  He 
filled  three  missions  to  Denmark,  pre- 
siding over  the  mission  in  1921-1926. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  7,  1917,  by  David  0.  Mc- 
Kay. 

RAWSON,  Wilford  Woodruff,  Bish- 
op of  the  Ogden  8th  Ward,  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1912  to  1925,  was 
born  Sept.  1,  1881,  in  Harrisville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Daniel  B.  Rawson  and 
Mary  Melvina  Taylor.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  3,  1889,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  in  1901-1902,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Jan.  12,  1913,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

SAUNDERS,  Edward  Thomas,  Bish- 
op of  the  Ogden  4th  Ward,  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Sept.  14,  1886,  in  Ogden, 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  G.  Saunders 
and  Amelia  Ann  Batchelor.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  3,  1896,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  10,  1919,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop  March 
27,  1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

SHAW,  James  Edmond,  Bishop  of 
the  Liberty  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1929,  was  born  Oct.  25, 
1879,  in  Pleasant  View,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Edmund  R.  Shaw  and  Jane  Ward. 
He  was  baptized  July  7,  1892,  ordained 
a  Seventy  Feb.  14,  1922,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1922- 
1924,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Dec.  6,  1925,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 

SHAW,  James  Leon,  Bishop  of  the 
Liberty    Ward,    Ogden    Stake,    Utah, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


561 


from  1918  to  1925,  was  born  March  25, 
1888,  in  North  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of 
George  Shaw  and  Mary  S.  Storey.  He 
was  baptized  July  2,  1896,  ordained  an 
Elder  March  6,  1909,  by  Arthur  M. 
Ferrin,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1909-1911,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Oct.  19,  1913,  by  Thomas 

E.  McKay,  and  a  Bishop  March  17, 
1918,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

STALLINGS,  Virgil  B.,  Bishop  of 
the  Eden  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1927,  was  born  Nov.  8, 

1874,  in  Eden,  a  son  of  Joseph  Stal- 
lings  and  Charlotte  Hussey.  He  was 
baptized  June  1,  1886,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  17,  1924,  by  Jos. 

F.  Smith,  jun. 

WADE,  Charles  Franklin,  Bishop  of 
the  Liberty  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1907  to  1909,  was  born  Dec.  8, 
1853,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Edward  D.  Wade  and  Belinda  Hick- 
enlooper.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  22,  1907,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

WARD,  James,  Bishop  of  the  North 
Ogden  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1894  to  i912,  was  born  June  12,  1840, 
in  Pewsy,  Wiltshire,  England,  a  son  of 
William  and  Sarah  Ward.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  6,  1856,  came  to  Utah  in 
1861,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  20,  1882. 

WARD,  Joseph  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Liberty  Ward,  Ogden  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1904  to  1906,  was  born  Nov.  25, 

1875,  at  North  Ogden,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  Ward  and  Har- 
riet Bi'own.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  of  age,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1915-1916,  and  was 
sustained  as  Bishop  Feb.  21,  1904. 


Oneida  Stake 


CARVER,  George  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Preston  3rd  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Ida- 

Vol.  IV,  No.  36 


ho,  from  1902  to  1917,  was  born  Nov. 
11,  1854,  in  Kaysville,  Utah  a  son  of 
John  Carver  and  Mary  Ann  Fames. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  10,  1866,  filled 
two  missions,  one  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1879-1881  and  the  other  to 
the  Northwestern  States  in  1898-1899. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  3,  1902, 
by  Marriner  W.  Merrill.  He  died  June 
21,  1922. 

CARVER,  Parley  Pratt,  Bishop  of 
the  Glencoe  Wax-d,  Oneida  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1919  to  1923,  was  born  Jan. 
17,  1867,  in  Plain  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  Carver  and  Mary  Ann  Fames. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  5, 
1910,  by  Joseph  Belnap,  and  a  Bishop 
June  15,  1919,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

CON  DIE,  Parley  M.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Oneida  Stake  presidency, 
Idaho,  from  1920  to  1921,  and  first 
counselor  from  1921  to  1929,  was  born 
June  9,  1889,  in  Croydon,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Thomas  Condie  and  Hannah  Swann. 
He  was  baptized  July  4,  1897,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1915-1918, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June 
6,  1920,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman,  and  set 
apart  as  2nd  counselor  in  the  Oneida 
Stake.  On  Aug.  14,  1921,  he  was  pro- 
moted to  first  counselor  and  set  apart 
by  James  E.  Talmage. 

DAVIS,  James  W.,  Bishop  of  the 
Clifton  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1911  to  1914,  was  born  Dec.  23, 
1882,  at  Clifton,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Riley 
Davis  and  Jenette  McMurrin.  He  was 
baptized  May  6,  1891,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  2,  1905,  by  Chas,  D.  Goas- 
lind,  and  a  Bishop  June  11,  1911,  by 
David  O.  McKay.  He  died  in  May^ 
1914,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

DIXON,  Harvey,  Bishop  of  the  Clif- 
ton Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1877  to  1885,  was  born  Sept.  12,  1844, 
in  Hancock  County,  111.,  the  son  of  Wm. 
W.  and  Sabra  Dixon.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  Ogden  when  eight  years  old, 

Sept.  5,  193& 


562 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
by  Erastus  Snow  in  1877,  and  moved 
to  Star  Valley  in  1885. 

EAMES,  David  Greaves,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Oneida  Stake  presidency, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  29,  1879,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a  son 
of  David  C.  Eames  and  Elizabeth 
Greaves.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Feb.  27,  1902,  by  his  father  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northwestern  States 
in  1902-1904.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  17,  1910,  by  Anthony  W. 
Ivins,  and  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
in  the  Oneida  Stake  presidency  Feb. 
17,  1929,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

ERICKSEN,  Louis  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Glencoe  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1909  to  1918,  was  born  June  22, 
1866,  in  Wingaker,  Sweden,  a  son  of 
Erick  Ericksen  and  Christina  Olson. 
He  was  baptized  April  16,  1882,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  26,  1910, 
by  John  Henry  Smith. 

EVANS,  David  Samuel,  Bishop  of 
the  Riverdale  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1910  to  1922,  was  born 
June  13,  1882,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a  son 
of  David  P.  Evans  and  Sarah  Smith. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  2,  1890,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1903-1905, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  4,  1910,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith. 

FORSGREN,  Eli  Smith,  Bishop  of 
the  Riverdale  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  25,  1890,  in  Riverdale,  a  son  of 
Eli  Forsgren  and  Frances  Smith.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  15,  1900,  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  Sept.  11,  1910,  by 
James  R.  McNeil,  filled  a  mission  to 
France  in  1910-1913,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  11, 
1922,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

FORSGREN,  John  Clifford,  Bishop 
of  the  Preston  4th  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 


from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct. 
18,  1893,  in  Riverdale,  Idaho,  a  son  of 
Eli  Forsgren  and  Frances  Smith.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  5,  1903,  filled  a 
mission  to  Australia  in  1915-1919,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  1,  1929,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

GEDDES,  James  Stewart,  Bishop  of 
the  Banida  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1914  to  1918,  was  born  May  18, 
1873,  in  Plain  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
W.  S.  Geddes  and  Martha  Stewart.  He 
was  baptized  July  7,  1881,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  7,  1906, 
by  Geo.  C.  Parkinson,  and  a  Bishop 
June  7,  1914,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

GRIFFETH,  George  Andrew,  Bish- 
op of  the  Dayton  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1925  to  1930 +  .  "vas  born 
Sept.  20,  1870,  in  Hyde  Park,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Geo.  Andrew  Griffeth  and  Mary 
E.  Thurman.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
20,  1878,  was  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  4, 
1898,  by  Moroni  W.  Pratt,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1898-1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  15,  1925,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HATCH,  Walter,  Bishop  of  the  Ox- 
ford Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1904  to  1920,  was  born  April  17,  1868, 
in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of  Orrin 
Hatch  and  Maria  Thompson.  He  was 
baptized  June  24,  1877,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1899- 
1901,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  May 
15,  1904,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

HAWKES,  William,  jun.,  Bishop  of 
the  Preston  3rd  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1920  to  1930 -f-,  was  born 
May  17,  1884,  in  Hyde  Park,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  Hawkes  and  Susie 
Lamb.  He  was  baptized  June  2,  1892, 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  28,  1904,  by 
Geo.  H.  Carver,  and  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  in  1904-1906.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  30,  1907,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


563 


and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Winder  Ward.  On  July  4,  1920,  he 
was  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Preston  3rd  Ward. 

HENDRICKS.  William  Dorris,  pres- 
ident of  the  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1884  to  1887,  was  born  Nov.  6,  1829, 
in  Fi-anklin,  Kentucky,  a  son  of  James 
Hendricks  and  Druscilla  Dorris.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
went  to  California  as  one  of  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion,  and  came  to  Utah  in 
1847.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  10,  1877,  and  was  set  apart  June 

I,  1884,  as  president  of  Oneida  Stake 
by  Moses  Thatcher.  He  died  May  7, 
1909. 

HYMAS,  Benjamin,  Bishop  of  the 
Treasureton  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1892  to  1902  and  from  1905  to 
1911,  was  born  May  26,  1846,  in  Essex, 
England,  a  son  of  William  Hymas  and 
Mary  Ann  Atkins.  He  was  baptized 
about   1856  in   England,  and  on  Dec. 

II,  1892,  he  was  set  apart  as  Bishop 
over  the  newly  organized  Ward.  He 
died  May  15,  1925. 

HYMAS,  Dell  Grover,  Bishop  of  the 
Treasureton  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  31,  1894,  in  Treasureton,  a  son  of 
Benjamin  Hymas  and  Hannah  Thur- 
ston. He  was  baptized  Aug.  31,  1902, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  16, 
1926,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards;  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Feb.  19,  1928,  by  James 
E.  Talmage. 

JENSEN,  Oleen  Alder,  Bishop  of 
the  Glendale  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  24,  1899, 
in  Preston,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Hyrum  D. 
Jensen  and  Margaret  Alder.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  24,  1907,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  10,  1930, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

JONES,  Charles,  Bishop  of  the  Day- 
ton Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho,  from 


1920  to  1925,  was  born  Aug.  22,  1880, 
in  Smithfield,  Utah,  a  son  of  Robert 
J.  Jones  and  Eliza  Ann  CoUett.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1890,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  8,  1914,  by  James 
Johnson,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
5,  1920,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

KELLER,  James  Morgan,  Bishop  of 
the  Mink  Creek  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1909  to  1916,  died  Dec.  31, 
1920,  in  Mink  Creek.  (See  also  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  434.) 

KOFOED.  Orson,  Bishop  of  the  Clif- 
ton Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  28,  1882, 
in  Weston,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Hans  A. 
Kofoed  and  Thora  Mary  Anderson.  He 
was  baptized  April  3,  1890,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  5,  1920,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
14,  1929,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

LARSEN,  Christian  James,  Bishop 
of  the  Glendale  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1923  to  1930,  was  born 
Jan.  17,  1894,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Lars  C.  Larsen  and  Elizabeth  A. 
Hebden.  He  was  baptized  May  11, 
1902,  filled  a  mission  to  Samoa  in 
1916-1920,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  13,  1922,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

LARSEN,      Lars     Christian,     jun.. 

Bishop  of  the  Glendale  Ward,  Oneida 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1895  to  1905,  was 
born  June  27,  1867,  in  Logan,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Lars  C.  Larsen  and  Clara  C. 
Jensen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  3, 
1876,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct. 
1,  1893,  by  Jos.  S.  Geddes,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  June  9,  1895. 

MERRIL,  Austin  Taylor,  presiding 
Elder  from  1889  to  1893,  and  Bishop 
from  1893  to  1895,  of  the  Glendale 
Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho,  was  born 
May  7,  1869,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Austin  T.  Merril  and  Mary  Hatton. 


564 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


He  was  baptized  in  1877,  and  was  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  Oct.  1,  1893. 

MERRILL,  Harrison  Reuben,  first 
counselor  in  the  Oneida  Stake  presi- 
dency, Idaho,  from  1920  to  1921,  (Bish- 
op of  the  Preston  3rd  Ward  from  1917 
to  1920),  was  born  Nov.  13,  1884,  in 
Smithfield,  Utah,  a  son  of  Orrin  J. 
Merrill  and  Elizabeth  White.  He  was 
baptized  May  20,  1893,  ordained  a  Bish- 
op June  3,  1917,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  set  apart  to  preside  over  the 
Preston  3rd  Ward;  was  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  in  the  stake  presidency 
June  3,  1920,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

MILES,  Jeddie  Leroy,  Bishop  of  the 
Banida  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1922  to  1929,  was  born  March  1, 
1881,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Edwin  R.  Miles  and  Jane  Mouritsen. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  3,  1889,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
11,  1922,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

MORTENSEN,  Andrew  D.,  Bishop 
of  the  Glendale  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1905  to  1917,  was  born 
July  15,  1874,  in  Spring  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Andrew  Mortensen  and  Annie 
Catherine  Hansen.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  7,  1882,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  17,  1906,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

NELSON,  Taylor,  president  of  the 
Oneida  Stake  of  Zion,  Idaho,  from  1920 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  23,  1878,  in 
Franklin,  Idaho,  a  son  of  William  G. 
Nelson  and  Elvira  Vail.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  23,  1886,  and  after  being 
ordained  a  Seventy  Aug.  18,  1897,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1897-1899. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June 
15,  1902,  by  Albert  Nephi  Clements, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  15,  1908, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant.  He  presided  over 
the  Riverdale  Ward  until  1910,  acted 
as  second  counselor  in  the  stake  presi- 
dency from  1'910  to  1920,  »nd  was  set 


apart   as   president   June   6,  1920,   by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

OLSON,  Olof  Angus,  Bishop  of  the 
Oxford  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June  21, 
1886,  in  Oxford,  a  son  of  Olof  Regal 
and  Betty  Adelia  Olson.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  5,  1894,  filled  a  mission  to 
Sweden  in  1912-1914,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  5,  1920,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  18,  1928, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

PALMER,  Thomas  Condie,  Bishop 
of  the  Winder  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1913  to  1917,  and  from 
1921  to  1930  + ,  was  born  Oct.  31, 
1882,  in  Croyden,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam C.  Palmer  and  Margaret  Condie. 
He  was  baptized  July  11,  1891,  ordain- 
ed an  Elder  by  Wm.  A.  Skidmore,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1903-1905,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  1,  1907,  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a 
Bishop  Sept.  7,  1913,  by  James  E. 
Talmage. 

PORTER,  Nahum  Boyd,  Bishop  of 
the  Glendale  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1917  to  1920,  was  born  Feb. 
1,  1866,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of  Na- 
hum B.  Porter  and  Rachel  Ann  Mur- 
ray. He  was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1874, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  17,  1900,  by 
Mathias  F.  Cowley,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1900-1902,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  4,  1910, 
by  Samuel  W.  Parkinson  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  2,  1917,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

QUAYLE,  Philip.  Bishop  of  the 
Treasureton  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1902  to  1905,  was  born  June 
29,  1861,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a  son  of 
James  Quayle  and  Elizabeth  Gillions. 
He  was  baptized  in  1871,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1898-1901,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Jan.  19,  1902,  by  Marriner  W.  Mer- 
rill.   He  died  in  1930,  in  Willard,  Utah. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


565 


RASMUSSEN,  Rasmus,  Bishop  of 
the  Mink  Creek  Ward,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1877  to  1889,  was  born 
Nov.  4,  1835,  on  the  island  of  Falster, 
Denmark,  a  son  of  Christoffer  Ras- 
mussen  and  Kirsten  Clausen.  He  was 
baptized  July  13,  1867,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1871,  filled  a  mission  to  Scan- 
dinavia in  1885-1887,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  in  May,  1877. 
He  died  at  Mink  Creek  Dec.  25,  1918. 

SHULDBERG,    William    Anderson, 

Bishop  of  the  Winder  Wai'd,  Oneida 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1909  to  1913,  was 
born  Dec.  1,  1873,  in  Munkthorp,  Swe- 
den, a  son  of  Peter  A.  Shuldberg  and 
Anna  Anderson.  He  was  baptized 
May  18,  1893,  came  to  Utah  that  same 
year,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
30,  1907,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  who 
also  ordained  him  a  Bishop  Sept.  4, 
1909.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Sweden 
in  1913-1915. 

SHUMWAY,  Charles  Mendon,  Bish- 
op of  the  Treasureton  Ward,  Oneida 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1911  to  1928,  was 
born  July  15,  1872,  in  Mendon,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Andrew  P.  Shumway  and 
Mary  Christian.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  25,  1904,  by  William  C. 
Parkinson,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
9,  1911,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

TAYLOR,  James  Daniel,  Bishop  of 
the  Banida  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1910  to  1914  and  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  29,  1880,  in 
Vernal,  Utah,  the  son  of  Lamoni  Tay- 
lor and  Levona  O.  Rawson.  He  was 
baptized  April  1,  1889,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty in  December,  1898,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1898- 
1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Dec.  4,  1910,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith. 

WILLIAMS,  James  L.,  Bishop  of  the 
Clifton  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1923  to  1929,  was  born  July  8, 


1892,  in  Clifton,  Idaho,  the  son  of 
Lorin  F.  Williams  and  Elizabeth  N. 
Henderson.  He  was  baptized  July  8, 
1900,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1911-1914,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  6,  1914,  by  Taylor 
Nelson,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 

1,  1923,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

WESTERBERG,  Alfred  Erick,  Bish- 
op of  the  Glencoe  Ward,  Oneida 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  April  4,  1874,  in  Westervik,  Swe- 
den, a  son  of  Erick  E.  Westerberg  and 
Caroline  Olson.    He  was  baptized  Jan. 

2,  1887,  emigrated  to  Utah  that  same 
year,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
18,  1928,  by  Taylor  Nelson,  and  a  Bish- 
op Sept.  14,  1929,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

WESTERBERG,  Charles  Axel,  Bish- 
op of  the  Glencoe  War-d,  Oneida  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1923  to  1929,  was  born 
July  8,  1876,  in  Vingaker,  Sweden,  a 
son  of  Erick  E.  Westerberg  and  Caro- 
line Olson.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1887, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  March  9, 
1918,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bish- 
op Feb.  11,  1923,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

PETERSON,  Carl  Enoch,  Bishop  of 
the  Glencoe  Ward,  Oneida  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1918  to  1919,  was  born  Dec. 
22,  1889,  in  Mink  Creek,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  Peter  Peterson  and  Christina  Olson. 
He  was  baptized  Dec.  22,  1897,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  9,  1918,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 


Oquirrh  Stake 


ANDERSON,  Henry  Claude,  Bishop 
of  the  Garfield  Ward,  Oquirrh  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1927,  was  born 
June  16,  1888,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Henry  J.  Anderson  and  Eliza- 
beth Y.  Pyper.  He  was  baptized  in 
July,  1896,  ordained  an  Elder  April  26, 
1909,  by  John  Cameron,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1909-1911,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  15,  1920, 


566 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


by  Charles  H.  Hyde,  and  a  Bishop 
June  19,  1923,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

BAWDEN,  John  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Magna  Ward,  Oquirrh  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1916  to  1920,  was  born  March  22, 
1885,  in  Granger,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
Howard  Bawden  and  Alice  Jane  Free- 
stone. He  was  baptized  March  28, 
1893,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  March  6,  1916,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

DAY,  Henry  Earl,  second  counselor 
in  the  Oquirrh  Stake  presidency,  Utah, 
from  1923  to  1929  and  first  counselor 
from  1929  to  1930,  was  born  March  10, 
1892,  in  Hunter,  Utah,  a  son  of  Lor- 
enzo Day  and  Elizabeth  J.  Russell.  He 
was  baptized  May  5,  1900,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Central  States  in  1913-1915, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 
12,  1920,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.  He 
was  set  apart  as  first  counselor  in  the 
stake  presidency  Feb.  3,  1929,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith,  jun. 

DAY,  James  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Garfield  Ward,  Oquirrh  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1927  to  1929,  was  born  Nov.  30, 
1876,  in  Draper,  Utah,  a  son  of  James 
H.  Day  and  Lucy  Stringfellow.  He 
was  baptized  May  9,  1885,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  19,  1923,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  15,  1927, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

FAIRBOURNE,    Joseph    Taylor, 

president  of  the  Bacchus  Branch, 
Oquirrh  Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930,  was  born  Aug.  4,  1886,  in  Salt 
Lake  County,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Watson  Fairbourne  and  Minnie  Sarah 
Taylor.  He  was  baptized  June  8,  1895, 
ordained  an  Elder  April  4,  1909,  by 
William  Hudson,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  in  1909-1911,  and 
was  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Bacchus  Branch  in  March,  1929. 

GRANT,  William  Albert,  Bishop  of 
the    Granger    Ward,    Oquirrh    Stake, 


Utah,  from  1914  to  1920,  was  born 
March  5,  1878,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Grant  and  Emma  Eames. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  29,  1914,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

HALL,  Omer  Emmett,  Bishop  of  the 
Pleasant  Green  Ward,  Oquirrh  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1928,  was  born  May 

5,  1890,  in  Great  Bend,  Kansas,  a  son 
of  Edmond  Estep  Hall  and  Anna  Eliza- 
beth Hurst.  He  was  baptized  June  7, 
1903,  came  to  Utah  in  1911,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  21,  1921,  by 
James  E.  Talmage,  and  a  Bishop  June 
20,  1923,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

HARKNESS,    William    Thomas, 

Bishop  of  the  Magna  Ward,  Oquirrh 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1930,  was 
born  Jan.  12,  1886,  in  Belfast,  Ireland, 
a  son  of  William  Harkness  and  Eliza- 
beth Anderson.    He  was  baptized  Mar. 

6,  1900,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1902,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op June  24,  1923,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HEALY,  Leonard  Carson,  Bishop  of 
the  Pleasant  Green  Ward,  Oquirrh 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  25,  1888,  in  Murray,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Healy  and  Clara 
Hanson.  He  was  baptized  June  5, 
1897,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Nether- 
lands in  1907-1910,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  4,  1928,  by  Geo.  Al- 
bert Smith,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  10,  1929, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

LAYTON,  Christopher  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Hunter  Ward,  Oquirrh  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1899  to  1902,  was  born 
Sept.  6,  1867,  in  Kaysville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Charles  Layton  and  Sarah  A. 
Crockett.  He  was  ordained  a  Hign 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  25,  1899,  by 
John  Henry  Smith. 

LITTLE,  George  Alvin,  president  of 
the  Oquirrh  Stake  of  Zion,  Utah,  from 
1923  to  1929,  was  born  Jan.  15,  1868, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


567 


in  Brighton,  Utah,  the  son  of  Geo.  Ed- 
win Little  and  Martha  Taylor.  He 
was  baptized  in  1876,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty May  20,  1902,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1902-1904.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  6,  1916,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  presided  over  the  Pleasant  Green 
Ward  until  Nov.  18,  1919.  When  the 
Oquirrh  Stake  was  organized  June  3, 
1923,  he  was  set  apart  as  president 
of  that  Stake  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

MURDOCK,  Keith,  Bishop  of  the 
Garfield  Ward,  Oquirrh  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  April 
10,  1900,  in  Heber  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Nelson  Murdock  and  Lavina  E. 
Averett.  He  was  baptized  May  2,  1908, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  6,  1921,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a  mission 
to  California  in  1921-1924,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  5,  1929,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

PENDLETON,     John     Benjamin, 

Bishop  of  the  Garfield  Ward,  Oquix-rh 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1923,  was 
born  Oct.  18,  1876,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Joshua  Pendleton  and 
Zelpha  Stewart.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
6,   1885,  oi'dained  a  Seventy  Jan.  20, 

1900,  by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Hawaii  in  1900-1901.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  23, 

1901,  by  Reed  Smoot,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.  30,  1909,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  to  preside  over  the  Grass  Creek 
Ward.  He  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
of  the  Garfield  Ward  Sept.  24,  1916, 
and  set  apart  to  that  position  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

WOOLLEY,  Ranald  Mills,  Bishop  of 
the  Magna  Ward,  Oquirrh  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1923,  was  born 
Aug.  12,  1883,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Frank  Albert  Woolley  and 
Eliza  Kimball.  He  was  baptized  in 
1891,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March  3, 
1916,    by    Francis    M.    Lyman,    and    a 


Bishop  Feb.  22,  1922,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 


Palmyra  Stake 

ALLEN,  Wilbur  Bird,  Bishop  of  the 
Salem  Ward,  Palmyra  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1930,  was  born  April  10, 
1881,  in  Glenwood,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Joseph  William  Allen  and 
Fannie  Kindred.  He  was  baptized  June 
2,  1893,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Aug.  21,  1920,  by  George 
F.  Richards. 

ANDERSON,    Thomas    Measom, 

Bishop  of  the  Lake  Shore  Ward,  Pal- 
myra Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  12,  1886,  at 
Lake  Shore,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  George  Anderson  and  Rosetta  Mea- 
som. He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1895, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  23,  1924,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

ARGYLE,  Lorenzo,  Bishop  of  the 
Lake  Shore  Ward,  Palmyra  Stake, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1886  to  1913, 
was  born  Oct,  26,  1852,  at  Birming- 
ham, England,  the  son  of  Joseph  Ar- 
gyle  and  Jane  Finch.  He  was  baptized 
June  4,  1865,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  12,  1886,  by 
Franklin  D.  Richards. 

BECK  STROM,  William  Charles, 

Bishop  of  the  Spanish  Fork  1st  Ward, 
Palmyra  Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1918  to  1930,  was  born  June  5,  1882, 
at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  N.  Beckstrom  and  Mary  C.  Han- 
sen. He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1891, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  2,  1918,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

BRIGGS,  Isaac,  Bishop  of  the  Span- 
ish Fork  4th  Ward,  Palmyra  Stake, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Dec.  8,  1883,  at  Wretham, 
Norfolk,  England,  the  son  of  John 
Briggs    and    Sarah    Greenwood.      He 


568 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


was  baptized  June  13,  1897,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Nov.  23,  1924,  by  Ste- 
phen L.  Richards,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Feb.  15,  1925,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

BROCKBANK,  Wells  Thomas,  first 

counselor  to  President  Henry  A.  Gard- 
ner in  the  Palmyra  Stake  presidency, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  17,  1891,  in  Spanish 
Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Sam- 
uel Brockbank  and  Mary  Jane  Thom- 
as. He  was  baptized  March  17,  1899, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  24,  1916, 
by  William  E.  Potts,  ordained  a  Bish- 
op May  26,  1918,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Palmyra  Stake 
April  28,  1929,  by  Stephen  L.Richards. 

DAVIS,  Ray,  Bishop  of  the  Salem 
Ward,  Palmyra  Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  6, 
1886,  in  Salem,  the  son  of  James  J. 
Davis  and  Harriet  Matilda  Kelsey.  He 
was  baptized  June  6,  1895,  ordained  a 
Seventy  Nov.  29,  1908,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States  in  1915-1917,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  16,  1925,  by  George 
F.  Richards,  who  also  ordained  him  a 
Bishop  Jan.  27,  1929. 

EVANS,  Charles  David,  Bishop  of 
the  Salem  Ward,  Palmyra  Stake,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1879  to  1887,  was  born 
March  6,  1829,  in  the  town  of  Shrews- 
bury, Shropshire,  England,  the  son  of 
Edward  Evans  and  Charlotte  Feather- 
stone.  He  was  baptized  April  21, 1848, 
at  Shrewsbury,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Jan.  6,  1857,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1876-1878,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  29,  1876,  by  Henry 
Mower,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  1, 
1879,  by  President  John  Taylor.  He 
died  May  14,  1908. 

FOSTER,  William  George,  Bishop 
of  the  Lake  Shore  Ward,  Palmyra 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to 
1924,   was    born    March    23,    1880,    at 


Auckland,  New  Zealand,  the  son  of 
George  Foster  and  Matilda  Johnson. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  4,  1888,  at 
Leamington,  Millard  Co.,  Utah,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  23,  1920,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

GROTEGUT,  Simon  William,  Bish- 
op of  the  Spanish  Fork  4th  Ward, 
Palmyra  Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1912  to  1925,  was  born  Dec.  1,  1875, 
at  Spanish  Fork,  the  son  of  Carl  L. 
Grotegut  and  Kirsten  Simsen.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  7,  1884,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  21,  1904,  by  Jonathan  S. 
Page,  jun.,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov. 
24,  1912,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

HALES,  George  Ray,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Palmyra 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  7,  1889,  at  Span- 
ish Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
George  Hales  and  Eliza  Brockbank. 
He  was  baptized  April  28,  1897,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  28,  1929, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards,  and  set  apart 
as  second  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Palmyra  Stake  in  1929. 

HANSEN,  Abraham   Jorgensen, 

Bishop  of  Spanish  Fork  4th  Ward, 
Palmyra  Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1901  to  1913,  was  born  March  13,  1862, 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  Hansen  and  Caroline  Jorgen- 
sen. He  was  baptized  June  16,  1872, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  1,  1901,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

HANSEN,  Erastus,  Bishop  of  the 
Palmyra  Ward,  Palmyra  Stake,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1929,  was  born 
May  2,  1872,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jens  Hansen  and 
Karen  Andersen.  He  was  baptized 
May  2,  1880,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  13,  1921,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

HUNTINGTON,  Edward  Ray,  Bish- 
op   of   the    Palmyra   Ward,    Palmyra 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


569 


Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  March  17,  1889,  in 
Spanish  Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  Albert  Huntington  and  Sarah 
Jane  Banks.  He  was  baptized  June 
26,  1898,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Jan.  27,  1929,  by  George 
F.  Richards. 

JEX,  Richard  Leon,  Bishop  of  the 
Spanish  Fork  1st  W  a  r  d,  Palmyra 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  April  7,  1887,  in 
Spanish  Fork,  the  son  of  Richard  H. 
and  Ruth  Jex.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
1,  1895,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  April  28,  1929,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards. 

KOYLE,  John  H..  Bishop  of  the  Le- 
land  Ward,  Palmyra  Stake,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1913,  was  born 
Aug.  14,  1864,  at  Spanish  Fork,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  Koyle  and 
Adlinda  Hillman.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  of  age,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  in  1900,  by  Reed 
Smoot,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May  31, 
1908,   by  Rudger   Clawson. 

LARSON,  Lars  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Leland  Ward,  Palmyra  Stake,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1913  to  1921,  was  born 
May  8,  1863,  in  Glostrup,  Sjaelland, 
Denmark,  the  son  of  Lars  Larsen  and 
Johanne  Jensen.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  of  age,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  24,  1913,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

MARKHAM,  Stephen  David,  Bishop 
of  the  Leland  Wai'd,  Palmyi-a  Stake, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Max'ch  2,  1885,  in  Spanish 
Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Wil- 
liam Don  Carlos  Markham  and  Sarah 
Ann  Warner.  He  was  baptized  June 
4,  1893,  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  3,  1904, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Netherlands  in 
1905-1907,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  24,  1913,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  24,  1922, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 


MARKHAM.    William    Don   Carlos. 

Bishop  of  the  Leland  Ward,  Palmyra 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1900  to 
1908,  was  born  Jan.  6,  1855,  at  Pal- 
myra, Utah,  the  son  of  Stephen  Mark- 
ham  and  Mary  Curtis.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  14,  1868,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty March  9,  1884,  by  William  Sto- 
ker, filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1885-1887,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  10,  1891,  by  George 
D.  Snell,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
29,  1900,  by  Reed  Smoot.  He  died  May 
9,  1908. 

McKELL,  Arthur  Thomas,  Bishop 
of  the  Spanish  Fork  5th  Ward,  Pal- 
myra Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1929  to  1930  4- ,  was  born  June  7,  1888, 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Henry  J.  McKell  and  Alice  V. 
Jex.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1896, 
ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  29,  1908,  by 
Robert  W.  McKell,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Netherlands  and  Belgium  in  1908- 
1911,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  20,  1927,  by  John  H.  Hayes, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  April  28,  1929, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

McKELL,  Robert  Wilson,  Bishop  of 
the  Spanish  Fork  1st  Ward,  Palmyra 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1917  to 
1918,  was  born  Nov.  16,  1856,  in  Span- 
ish Fork,  Utah,  the  son  of  Robert  Mc- 
Kell and  Elizabeth  Boyack.  He  was 
baptized  July  14,  1867,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  6,  1892,  by  David 
John,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  13, 
1901,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards.  He  died 
May  12,  1911. 

MORGAN,  Ralph  David,  Bishop  of 
the  Spanish  Fork  3rd  Ward,  Palmyra 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1917  to 
1930,  was  born  Feb.  28,  1882,  in  Span- 
ish Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
David  Morgan  and  Elizabeth  Prior. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1896,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
27,  1917,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 


570 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ROWE,  Edward  Morris,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Palmyra 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1924  to 
1929,  was  born  Dec.  9,  1878,  in  Spanish 
Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Owen 
Rowe  and  Ann  Creer.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  of  age, 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  in  the 
Palmyra  Stake  presidency  Nov.  23, 
1924,  by  John  A.  Widtsoe. 

SMITH,  LeGrand  Fitzgerald, Bishop 
of  the  Spanish  Fork  3rd  Ward,  Pal- 
myra Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  in  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  25,  1898,  at  Draper, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Heber 
A.  Smith  and  Sarah  Jane  Fitzgerald. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  3,  1906,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Oct.  29,  1922,  by  Hy- 
rum  Brown,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Cen- 
tral States  in  1919-1922,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan. 
26,  1930,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

SNELL,  George  Dixon,  Bishop  of 
the  Spanish  Fork  Ward,  Palmyra 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1874  to 
1891,  and  Bishop  of  the  Spanish  Fork 
1st  Ward,  Palmyra  Stake,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  from  1891  to  1902,  was  born 
March  18,  1836,  at  Sackville,  West- 
moreland Co.,  New  Brunswick,  the  son 
of  Cyrus  Snell  and  Rhoda  Barnes.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  12,  1858,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July 
10,  1874. 

TAYLOR,  David  R.,  Bishop  of  the 
Salem  Ward,  Palmyra  Stake,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1888  to  1910,  was  born 
Aug.  29,  1850,  in  Holly  Springs,  Surry 
Co.,  North  Carolina,  the  son  of  Thom- 
as Taylor  and  Mary  A.  Danley.  He 
was  baptized  in  May,  1869,  in  North 
Carolina,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1886-1888,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  21,  1888,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  died  Aug.  1, 
1935. 

WARNER,  Elisha,  Bi.shop  of  the 
Spanish     Fork    2nd     Ward,     Palmyra 


Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1924  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  April  24,  1889,  in 
Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  the  son  of  James 
Warner  and  Dorcas  Patterson.  He  was 
baptized  July  3,  1898,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  14,  1924,  by  Henry  A. 
Gardner,  filled  a  short  term  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1926,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  14,  1925, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 


Panguitch  Stake 

AHLSTROM,  Charles  Delbert, Bish- 
op of  the  Henrieville  Ward,  Panguitch 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1923,  was 
born  March  21,  1874,  in  Ephraim, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Peter  Ahlstrom  and 
Mary  Larson.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Sweden  in  1898-1900  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Aug.  29,  1920,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

ALLEN,  Rufus  Albern,  Bishop  of 
the  Junction  Ward,  Panguitch  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1887  to  1895,  was  born 
Oct.  12,  1856,  at  Harmony,  Washing- 
ton Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Rufus  Chester 
Allen  and  Lavenia  Hoops  Yearsley. 
He  was  baptized  May  7,  1865,  at 
Mountain  Dell,  Washington  Co.,  Utah, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  26,  1883, 
by  William  King,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  March  29,  1887,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

ASAY,  Aaron,  Bishop  of  the  Hatch 
Ward,  Panguitch  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1892  to  1900  (presiding  Elder  from 
1887  to  1892),  was  born  Oct.  7,  1855, 
in  Trenton,  New  Jersey,  a  son  of  Jos- 
eph A  say.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  30,  1892,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

BARN  HURST,    M  e  1 1  i  a  h    Hatch, 

Bishop  of  the  Hatch  Ward,  Panguitch 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Feb.  24,  1893,  in  Hatch,  a 
son  of  Samuel  James  Barnhurst  and 
Laura  Ann  Hatch.     He  was  baptized 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


571 


Aug.  10,  1901,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  31,  1924,  by  Wm.  J.  Henderson, 
and  a  Bishop  Sept.  3,  1924,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 

GARDINER,    Fredrick    George, 

Bishop  of  the  Panguitch  South  Ward, 
Panguitch  Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  18,  1879,  in 
Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Henry  Gardiner  and  Eliza  Ann  Watts. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  26,  1888,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  28,  1916, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop 
June  5,   1921,   by   Geo.   Albert   Smith. 

GOULDING,  Daniel,  Bishop  of  the 
Henrieville  Ward,  Panguitch  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1889  to  1905,  was  born 
March  31,  1831,  in  Winterburn,  Glou- 
cestershire, England,  a  son  of  John 
Goulding  and  Rosanna  Bray.  He  was 
baptized  in  July,  1845,  in  Wales,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1868  from  Australia, 
and  was  ordained  and  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Henrieville  Ward  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman  June  6,  1889. 

HANSEN,  Andrew  Janus,  Bishop 
of  the  Tropic  Wai'd,  Panguitch  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1895  to  1900,  was  born 
Aug.  6,  1852,  in  Holstebro,  Jutland, 
Denmark,  a  son  of  Christian  Hansen 
and  Margrete  Andersen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  28,  1868,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1869,  filled  a  mission  to  Nebraska 
in  1878-1879,  and  another  mission  to 
Denmark  in  1882-1884.  He  was  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  May  23,  1895.  He 
died  Nov.  4,  1932  as  a  Patriarch. 

HENRIE,  Jed  die  Nephi,  second 
counselor  in  the  Panguitch  Stake  pres- 
idency, Utah,  from  1921  to  1929,  was 
born  Feb.  24,  1881,  in  Panguitch,  a 
son  of  James  Henrie  and  Christina 
Schow.  He  was  baptized  July  14, 
1889,  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op May  28,  1916,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun.,  and  presided  over  the  Panguitch 
South  Ward  until  March  15,  1921, 
when  he  was  set  apart  as  second  coun- 


selor in  the  stake  presidency  by  Pres. 
Heber  J.  Grant.     He  died  March  30, 

1929. 

HENRIE,  John  Nathaniel,  presi- 
dent of  the  Panguitch  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1916  to  1921,  was  born  Sept.  10, 
1876,  in  Panguitch,  Utah,  a  son  of 
James  Henrie  and  Christina  Schow. 
He  was  baptized  May  10,  1885,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  30,  1908,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant,  and  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  stake  presidency, 
and  on  May  18,  1916.  He  was  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  Panguitch  Stake 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards.  He  died  Feb.  3, 
1921. 

IPSON,  Hans  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Panguitch  North  Ward,  Panguitch 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  May  13,  1877,  in  Panguitch,  a 
son  of  Niels  Peter  Ipson  and  Inger  K. 
Madsen.  He  was  baptized  June  14, 
1885;  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  4, 
1913,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bish- 
op May  28,  1916,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

OTT,  James  Robert,  Bishop  of  the 
Henrieville  Ward,  Panguitch  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Jan.  3,  1873,  in  Duncan's  Retreat, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  David 
Benton  Ott  and  Hannah  Normington. 
He  was  baptized  Jan.  3,  1881,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1907-1908,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  June,  1923,  by  James  E.  Talmage, 
and  officiated  as  acting  Bishop  until 
the  following  December,  when  he  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

OWENS,     William     Thomas,     jun., 

first  counselor  in  the  Panguitch  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  June  16,  1875,  in  Paragonah, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Wm.  T.  Owens  and 
Margaret  Jones.  He  was  baptized 
June  17,  1883,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1912-1915,  was  or- 
dained  a   High   Priest   Feb.   21,   1915, 


572 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  in  the  Panguitch  Stake 
presidency  May  28,  1916,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards. 

TIPPETTS,  Joseph  Alva,  Bishop  of 
the  Tropic  Ward,  Panguitch  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1904-1906,  was  born  March 
3,  1870,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Joseph  Tippetts  and  Sarah  Losee. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1891-1892,  and  was  oi'dained 
a  Bishop  April  24,  1904,  by  David 
Cameron. 

WILLIS,  John  William,  Bishop  of 
the  H  e  n  r  i  e  V  i  1 1  e  Ward,  Panguitch 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1915  to  1920,  was 
born  Jan.  12,  1885,  in  Hillsdale,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  P.  Willis  and  Mary 
Merrill.  He  was  baptized  in  1895,  or- 
dained an  Elder  Nov.  8,  1906,  by  Geo. 
Romney,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1906-1908,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  27,  1916,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

WILLIS,  William  Patterson,  Bish- 
op of  the  Henrieville  Ward,  Panguitch 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1905  to  1915,  was 
born  March  15,  1850,  in  Pottawattamie 
Co.,  Iowa,  a  son  of  William  T.  Willis 
and  Elizabeth  P.  Wilson.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  12,  1878,  came  to  Utah  in 
1852,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
1883,  and  a  Bishop  in  June,  1905.  He 
acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Kanosh  Ward 
for  seven  years,  and  died  March  24, 
1930. 

WORKMAN,  Abram  Smith,  presid- 
ing Elder  of  Hatch  Branch,  Panguitch 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1878  to  1887,  was 
born  Oct.  29,  1852,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Jacob  L.  Workman  and 
Rebecca  W.  Turner.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  28,  1860,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  17,  1897,  by  David  Cam- 
eron.    He  died  Oct.   16,  1918. 


Parowan  Stake 

ADAMS,  James  Leech,  Bishop  of 
the  Parowan  Wai'd,  Parowan  Stake, 
Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1911  to  1916,  was 
born  March  2,  1880,  in  Parowan,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Adams,  jun.,  and 
Mary  Jane  Richards.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  21,  1888,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  24,  1911, 
by  James  E.  Talmage. 

ARMSTRONG,     William     Franklin, 

Bishop  of  the  Enoch  Ward,  Parowan 
Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Jan.  23,  .1885,  at  Enoch,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Joseph  H.  Armstrong  and 
Mary  Ann  Smith.  He  was  baptized 
June  1,  1893,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  a  Bishop  March  9,  1930, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

BARTON,  Stephen  Smith,  Bishop 
of  the  Paragonah  Ward,  Parowan 
Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1897  to 
1908,  was  born  Jan.  3,  1839,  at  Leban- 
on, St.  Clair  Co.,  Illinois,  the  son  of 
John  Barton  and  Sally  Penn.  He  was 
baptized  Feb.  14,  1847,  at  Lebanon, 
Illinois,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
25,  1897,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

CORRY,  Elias  Moroni,  Bishop  of 
the  Cedar  2nd  Ward,  Parowan  Stake, 
Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1930  + , 
was  born  Feb.  21,  1884,  at  Cedar  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  William  H.  Corry 
and  Elizabeth  L.  Parry.  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  21,  1892,  filled  a  mission 
to  California  and  Oregon  in  1903-1905, 
and  was  sustained  as  Bishop  June  26, 
1921. 

FIFE,  Arthur  Root,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Paro- 
wan Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1925 
to  1930,  was  born  July  2,  1887,  at 
Cedar  City,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Joseph  S.  Fife  and  Kate  Root.  He 
was  baptized  in  July,  1897,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  May  31,  1925,  by  George 
F.  Richards,  and  set  apart  as  second 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


573 


counselor  in  the  Parowan  Stake  pres- 
idency. 

GRANGER,  Walter  Kiel,  Bishop  of 
the  Cedar  3rd  Ward,  Parowan  Stake, 
Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1926  , to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  11,  1888,  at  St.  George, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wal- 
ter Granger  and  Anna  Kiel.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  11,  1896,  ordained  an 
Elder  Sept.  14,  1909,  by  John  Henry 
Smith,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1909-1911,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec. 
5,    1926,   by   Rudger   Clawson. 

HULET,  Oscar  Jones,  Bishop  of  the 
Summit  Ward,  Parowan  Stake,  Iron 
Co.,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  April 
20,  1899,  in  Summit,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Oscar  Willard  Hulet  and  Susannah 
Jones.  He  was  baptized  July  6,  1907, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  8,  1921, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.  1,  1930,  by  Pres.  Heber 
J.  Grant. 

JONES,  Charles  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Enoch  Ward,  Parowan  Stake,  Iron 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1912  to  1930,  was 
born  April  19,  1868,  a  son  of  John  D. 
Jones  and  Susannah  Boren.  He  was 
baptized  in  1888,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Sept.  22,  1912,  by  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney. He  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1898-1900. 

JONES,  Thomas  J.,  first  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  Parowan 
Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1925  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  June  5,  1858,  in 
Cedar  City,  Iron  Co.,  Utah.  He  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  in  the 
Parowan  Stake  presidency  May  31, 
1925,  by  John  A.  Widtsoe.  He  died 
Jan.  8,  1931. 

TAYLOR,  Joseph  Elmer,  Bishop  of 
the  Harmony  Ward,  Parowan  Stake, 
Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  July  24,  1896,  at  Harmony, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  A.  Taylor  and 


Margaret  A.  Pace.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  7,  1904,  and  sustained  as  Bishop 
March  7,  1926. 

LYMAN,  William  Home,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Parowan  Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1909  to  1914,  and  fii'st  counselor  from 
1914  to  1919,  was  born  Feb.  19,  1861, 
at  Parowan,  Utah,  a  son  of  Amasa  M. 
Lyman  and  Pauline  Phelps.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  of  age,  or- 
dained an  Elder  Oct.  21,  1888,  by 
Charles  Adams,  and  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  Parowan  Stake 
presidency  Sept.  19,  1909,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman.  He  was  promoted  to  first 
counselor  Dec.  13,  1914. 

MARSDEN,     Lucius     Nelson,    jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Parowan  East  Ward, 
Parowan  Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1926  to  1929,  was  born  June  7,  1896, 
at  Parowan,  Utah,  the  son  of  Lucius 
Nelson  Marsden  and  Mary  Matheson. 
He  was  baptized  July  2,  1904,  ordained 
an  Elder  in  October,  1916,  by  Wilford 
Day,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1916-1919,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  16,  1921,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
in  March,  1926,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

MITCHELL,  Joseph  Clayton,  Bish- 
op of  the  Parowan  East  Ward,  Paro- 
wan Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1929 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  16,  1885,  in 
Parowan,  Utah,  the  son  of  William 
Cook  Mitchell  and  Hulda  Dalton.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  16,  1893,  ordained 
a  Seventy  Dec.  30,  1919,  by  T.  K. 
Holyoak,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Cen- 
tral States  in  1928,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  23, 
1929,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

PACE,  Wilson  Daniel,  Bishop  of 
the  Harmony  Wai'd,  Parowan  Stake, 
from  1867  to  1888,  was  born  July  27, 
1831,  in  Murfreesboro,  Rutherford 
Co.,  Tenn.,  a  son  of  William  Pace  and 
Elizabeth  Nichols.  He  became  a  mem- 


574 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ber  of  the  Church  at  an  early  day, 
joined  the  Mormon  Battalion  in  1846, 
and  marched  with  them  to  California. 
He  came  to  Utah  in  1847,  and  was 
an  early  settler  of  several  communi- 
ties; was  ordained  an  Elder  in  1858, 
later  a  Seventy  by  Lorenzo  Snow,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Aug.  20,  1867,  by  Erastus  Snow, 
and  acted  in  that  capacity  over  twenty 
years.  In  1897  he  moved  from  Har- 
mony, Utah,  to  Arizona  and  located 
in  Thatcher,  where  he  died  Oct.  31, 
1900. 

PALMER,  William  Rees,  was  Bish- 
op of  the  Cedar  West  Ward,  Parowan 
Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1918  to 
1921.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  157.) 

ROGERS,  Samuel  IloUister,  Bishop 
of  the  Parowan  2nd  Ward,  Parowan 
Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1869  to 
1879,  was  born  March  1,  1819,  at  Pal- 
myra, Portage  Co.,  Ohio,  the  son  of 
Chandler  Rogers  and  Amanda  Hollis- 
ter.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  22,  1839, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  14,  1869,  by  George  A.  Smith. 

TULLIS,  John  Hardman,  Bishop  of 
the  Newcastle  Ward,  Parowan  Stake, 
Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Sept.  6,  1879,  at  Pinto, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of 
David  Wilson  TuUis  and  Martha  Ec- 
cles.  He  was  baptized  June  30,  1889, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  21,  1914, 
by  Lucius  N.  Marsden,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Dec.  4,  1927,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

WEBSTER,    Francis    Parson    Urie, 

Bishop  of  the  Cedar  East  Ward,  Paro- 
wan Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1920 
to  1922,  was  born  May  22,  1893,  in 
Cedar  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  John  J. 
G.  Webster  and  Eliza  A.  Urie.  He 
was  baptized  June  9,  1901,  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1916  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man, filled  a  mission  to  Australia  in 
1916-1919,  and   was  ordained   a   High 


Priest  and  Bishop  March  21,  1920,  by 
George  F.  Richards. 

WILLIAMS,  Wells  Allison,  Bishop 
of  the  Kanarra  Ward,  Parowan  Stake, 
Iron  Co.,  Utah,  in  1930 -h,  was  born 
Dec.  15,  1895,  in  Kanarra,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Reese  Jones  Williams  and  Mar- 
tha Marie  Davis.  He  was  baptized 
June  20,  1904,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  14,  1930,  by 
Pres.   Heber   J.   Grant. 

WOOD,  Franklin  Bryner,  Bishop  of 
the  Cedar  East  (or  First)  Ward,  Paro- 
wan Stake,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  from  1924 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  13,  1881,  in 
Cedar  City,  Utah,  the  son  of  George 
H.  Wood  and  Elizabeth  A.  Bryner.  He 
was  baptized  June  27,  1890,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Central  States  in  1906- 
1908,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June 
19,  1908,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  March  16,  1924,  by 
George  Albert  Smith. 


Pioneer  Stake 


ANDREW,  Richard  Denton,  Bishop 
of  the  Salt  Lake  City  6th-7th  Ward, 
Pioneer  Stake,  Utah,  in  1927-1930 +  , 
was  born  July  11,  1883,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  a  son  of  Richard  Andrew  and 
Mary  Elizabeth  Croxall.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  4,  1891,  ordained  an  Elder 
April  22,  1903,  by  Geo.  R.  Scott,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Swiss-German  Mission 
in  1903-1906,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  16,  1916,  by  William  Mc- 
Lachlan,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  28,  1927, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

CANNON,  Tracy  Young,  Bishop  of 
the  Cannon  Ward,  Pioneer  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  July  23, 
1879,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  an 
adopted  son  of  George  Q.  Cannon.  His 
father's  name  was  Mark  Croxall.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  2,  1887,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  November,  1915,  by 
Wm.  McLachlan,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  14, 
1930,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


575 


CHILD,  Paul  Curtis,  Bishop  of  the 
Poplar  Grove  Ward,  Pioneer  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1922  to  1930,  was  born 
March  31,  1892,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Lester  A.  Child  and  Emma 
Goodale.  He  was  baptized  July  1, 
1900,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  1,  1922,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

CLUFF,  Leonard  Bruce,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  30th  Ward,  Pio- 
neer Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1929, 
was  born  July  31,  1886,  in  Provo, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Jerry  Cluff  and  Lydia 
Snow.  He  was  baptized  in  June,  1895, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Oct.  31,  1926,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

COTTRELL,  Charles,  jun.,  Bishop 
of  the  Salt  Lake  City  30th  Ward,  Pio- 
neer Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1926, 
was  born  Dec.  7,  1864,  in  Reading, 
Berkshire,  England,  a  son  of  Charles 
Cottrell  and  Leonora  Whitman.  He 
was  baptized  in  1873,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  16,  1902,  by  Joseph  E. 
Taylor,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
31,  1919,  by  Charles  W.  Penrose. 

DAVEY,  Charles  Edmund,  Bishop 
of  the  Cannon  Ward,  Pioneer  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1918  to  1930,  was  born 
April  19,  18'72,  in  Salt  Lake  City," 
Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  Davey  and 
Sarah  Ann  Butterworth.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  June,  1880,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  18,  1901,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  and  a  Bishop  May  26,  1918,  by 
Anthon  H.  Lund. 

DRURY,  Jesse  Moroni,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  5th  Ward,  Pioneer 
Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov. 
11,  1885,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Thomas  Drury  and  Sarah  Ann  Mor- 
ris. He  was  baptized  June  4,  1895, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  April  27,  1930, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

GERSTNER,  John  Joseph,  Bishop 
of  the  Salt  Lake  City  32nd  Ward,  Pio- 
neer Stake,  Utah,  from  1911  to  1924, 


was  born  July  24,  1865,  in  Zurich, 
Switzerland,  the  son  of  Joseph  Gerst- 
ner  and  Helena  Sophia  Wagener.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1874,  was  baptized  in 
1875,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  11,  1911,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman. 

HAMIVIOND,  Datus  Eugene,  presi- 
dent of  the  Pioneer  Stake  of  Zion, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930,  was  born 
Jan.  13,  1886,  in  Millville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Datus  R.  Hammond  and  Sarah 
M.  Gamble.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  22, 
1895,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1906-1907,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  29,  1917,  by  Charles  W. 
Penrose,  and  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Pioneer  Stake  in  1925. 

HANCOCK,   Jeremiah   A.,   first 

counselor  in  the  Pioneer  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1925  to  1929,  was 
born  April  3,  1871,  in  Payson,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Isaac  A.  Hancock  and  Mar- 
garet M.  Bingham.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  7,  1879,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  1,  1921,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun., 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  in 
the  Stake  presidency  in  1925. 

HYDE,  Charles  H.,  first  counselor 
in  the  Pioneer  Stake  presidency,  Utah, 
from  1916  to  1925,  was  born  Nov.  3, 
1861,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Charles  Walker  Hyde  and  Cecilia 
Funk.  He  filled  several  missions, 
the  first  one  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1902-1903,  and  he  presided  over 
the  Australian  Mission  in  1911-1913 
and  in  1924-1928.  He  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  in  the  Pioneer  Stake 
presidency  Jan.  28,  1917.  He  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Jan.  3,  1936. 

JENSEN,  Christian  Otto,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  32nd  Ward,  Pio- 
neer Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930, 
was  born  Oct.  25,  1892,  at  Aarhus, 
Denmark,  a  son  of  Jens  Waldemar 
Jensen  and  Dorthea  Marie  Petersen. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  twelve 


576 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


years  old,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1905, 
filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in 
1911-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  26,  1924,  by 
Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

McPHIE,  Joseph  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Salt  Lake  City  25th  Ward,  Pioneer 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  4,  1888,  in  Almy,  Wyo- 
ming, a  son  of  Martin  C.  McPhie  and 
Sarah  Cain.  He  was  baptized  July 
20,  1896,  ordained  a  High  Priest  June 
28,  1921,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and 
a  Bishop  Feb.  14,  1926,  by  Geo.  Al- 
bert Smith. 

PETTIT,  Jesse  Raymond,  Bishop  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  5th  Ward,  Pioneer 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1911  to  1918,  was 
born  July  25,  1886,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
a  son  of  Edwin  Pettit  and  Rebecca 
Hill.  He  was  baptized  July  30,  1894, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  April  23,  1911, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

SCHOENFELD,  Frederick  William, 

Bishop  of  the  Brighton  Ward,  Pioneer 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1911,  was 
born  Feb.  14,  1831,  in  Eilerburg,  Prus- 
sia, the  son  of  Friedrich  Schoenfeld 
and  Sophia  Krebs.  He  was  baptized 
May  23,  1856,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1864,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  29,  1877,  by  Daniel 
H.  Wells.     He  died  Jan.  4,  1919. 


Pocatello  Stake 


ALLEN,  Heber  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  American  Falls  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1917  to  1920,  was 
born  in  Utah,  Oct.  10,  1881,  the  son  of 
Andrew  Allen  and  Elizabeth  Lasley. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  16,  1889,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug. 
26,  1917,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

BECKSTEAD,   William   Warren, 

Bishop  of  the  American  Falls  Ward, 
Pocatello  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to 


1917,  was  born  March  26,  1871,  in 
Riverton,  Utah,  a  son  of  G.  M.  Beck- 
stead  and  Elinor  Davis.  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  11,  1909, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  a  Bishop 
May  16,  1915,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
In  1894-1896  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States. 

CARBON,  John  Roy,  Bishop  of  the 
Inkom  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct. 
1,  1886,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  David  Cardon  and  Elizabeth 
Neeser.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1895, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  25,  1923,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

CLARK,  Lawrence  D.,  Bishop  of 
the  Pocatello  4th  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Sept.  22,  1899,  at  Hooper, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Arthur  B.  Clark  and 
Mary  C.  Rasmussen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  22,  1907,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  23,  1924,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  and   ordained  a   Bishop   in   1926. 

COLLINGS,  James  Wesley,  Bishop 
of  the  American  Falls  Ward,  Poca- 
tello Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1930. 
was  born  Aug.  6,  1878,  in  Paris,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  James  Collings  and  Frances 
P.  Rich.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  6,  1887, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  28,  1900,  by 
Anthon  H.  Lund,  filled  a  mission  to 
Australia  in  1900-1903,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
23,  1920,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

CUTLER,     Ethan     Freeman,     jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Inkom  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1914  to  1921,  was 
born  July  23,  1877,  at  Brigham  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Ethan  F.  Cutler  and 
Lucy  Ann  Williams.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  4,  1885,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  1,  1901,  by  Noah  S.  Pond, 
and  a  Bishop  Feb.  15,  1914,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards. 

DUNN,   Samuel   A.,   Bishop   of  the 
North  Pocatello   Ward,   Pocatello 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


577 


Stake,  Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  12,  1898,  in  College 
Ward,  Logan  Stake,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  O.  Dunn  and  Letitia  Smith. 
He  was  baptized  March  26,  1906,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  25,  1928,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

EDGLEY,  Leo  Herbert,  Bishop  of 
the  Pocatello  2nd  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1921  to  1930,  was 
born  May  10,  1884,  in  London,  Eng- 
land. He  was  baptized  July  7,  1892, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  25,  1917, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop  Feb. 
26,  1921,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

FACER,  James  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
North  Pocatello  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1925  to  1927,  was  born 
Jan.  10,  1866,  in  Willard,  Utah,  a  son 
of  George  Facer  and  Sarah  Thompson. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  7,  1876,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  David  Mur- 
ray. He  was  sustained  as  Bishop  July 
12,  1925. 

FACER,  James  Vere,  Bishop  of 
North  Pocatello  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1927  to  1928,  was  born 
May  28,  1889,  in  Willard,  Utah,  a  son 
of  James  J.  Facer  and  Myrtle  Lishen- 
berg.  He  was  baptized  June  1,  1897, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  28,  1920, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  chosen  as 
Bishop  May  15,  1927. 

FINLAYSON,  Birdwell,  Bishop  of 
the  Pocatello  1st  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Sept.  12,  1893,  in  Payson, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Fredrick  James  Finlay- 
son  and  Josephine  Hickman.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  5,  1902,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  15,  1923,  by  William  A. 
Hyde,  and  a  Bishop  May  23,  1926,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

HENDERSON,    William    Williams, 

second  counselor  in  the  Pocatello 
Stake  presidency,  Idaho,  from  1914  to 
1915.  (See  Portneuf  Stake.) 


HENDRICKS,  Mile  A„  Bishop  of 
the  Pocatello  1st  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1908  to  1915,  was 
born  Feb.  25,  1865,  at  Richmond,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Dorris  Hendricks  and 
Mary  Jane  Andrews.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  1,  1877,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1886-1888,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  12,  1903, 
by  Abraham  O.  Woodruff,  and  a  Bish- 
op Dec.  13,  1908,  by  Francis  M.Lyman. 

HORSFALL,  Edward  Pettit,  Bishop 
of  the  Pocatello  3rd  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1923  to  1930  4", 
was  born  Jan.  31,  1889,  in  Oceanside, 
Nassau  Co.,  New  York,  the  son  of 
Charles  George  Horsfall  and  Mary 
Brown  Pettit.  He  was  baptized  May 
1,  1897,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Feb.  24,  1923,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 

JENSEN,  Joseph  Golden,  Bishop  of 
the  Pocatello  6th  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  April  2,  1898,  in  Riverton, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  Emanuel  Jen- 
sen and  Caroline  Madsen.  He  was 
baptized  June  30,  1906,  ordained  an 
Elder  June  8,  1919,  by  Ole  Hansen, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
in  1919-1921,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  23,  1925,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  25,  1928,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

JOHNSON,  Charles,  Bishop  of  the 
American  Falls  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1907  to  1915,  was  born 
Dec.  2,  1868,  in  Michigan,  a  son  of 
Christian  Johnson  (Jorgensen)  and 
Elsie  K.  Bartholsen.  He  was  baptized 
May  9,  1881,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  30,  1904,  by  William  A.  Hyde, 
and  a  Bishop  March  22,  1908,  by 
Charles  W.  Nibley. 

MAY,  Joseph  Eugene,  Bishop  of 
the  Rockland  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 


Vol.  IV,  No.  37 


Sept.  12,  1936 


578 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


May  24,  1882,  in  Calls  Fort,  Utah,  a 
son  of  James  May  and  Martha  Allen. 
He  was  baptized  May  24,  1890,  or- 
dained an  Elder  Jan.  6,  1907,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Western  States  in  1907- 
1909,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  May 
24,  1925,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

POND,  Moses  Alonzo,  Bishop  of 
the  Pocatello  1st  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1926,  was 
born  Oct.  2,  1876,  in  Richmond,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Stillman  Pond  and  Anna  Re- 
gina  Jacobson.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
2,  1884,  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  5,  1915,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 

PORTER,  Abinadi,  Bishop  of  the 
North  Pocatello  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1914  to  1919,  was 
born  March  28,  1865,  in  Porterville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Chauncey  Warner  Por- 
ter and  Lydia  Ann  Cook.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  7,  1874,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  1,  1904,  by  Abraham  O. 
Woodruff,  and  a  Bishop  March  15, 
1914,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

PORTER,  Omni  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
North  Pocatello  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1919  to  1920,  was 
born  March  7,  1895,  in  Basalt,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  Abinadi  Porter  and  Annie  L. 
Jensen.  He  was  baptized  July  18, 
1903,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  26,  1919,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 


Idaho,  from  1924  to  1926,  was  born 
March  31,  1882,  at  Birkenhead,  Che- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  James  H. 
Radley  and  Kate  Taylor.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  29,  1908,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug.  3,  1919,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  23, 
1924,  by   Rudger  Clawson. 

REDDISH,  Henry  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Pocatello  2nd  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1908  to  1917,  was  born 
April  26,  1876,  in  Derbyshire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  Henry  Reddish  and 
Eliza  Hurst.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  13,  1908,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

STUART,  William  C,  Bishop  of 
the  North  Pocatello  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1925,  was 
born  March  20,  1895,  at  American 
Fork,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  J.  Stuart 
and  Grace  Waterfall.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  the  year  1903,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  26,  1919,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun.,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  28,  1920,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

SUTTON,  David  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Pocatello  3rd  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1923,  was  born 
June  3,  1874,  in  Paris,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  John  A.  Sutton  and  Margaret 
Shepherd.  He  was  baptized  June  4, 
1882,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  1, 
1910,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  5,  1915,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 


QUINN,  James  Alfred.  Bishop  of 
the  Pocatello  5th  Ward,  Pocatello 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1921  to  1930 -H, 
was  born  Sept.  19,  1881,  in  Manassa, 
Colorado,  a  son  of  William  G.  Quinn 
and  Susan  C.  Dotson.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  19,  1895,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1907-1908,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Feb.  21,  1921,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

RADLEY,  James  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Pocatello  4th  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake, 


WEBB,  Edward  Milo,  Bishop  of  the 
Inkom  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1906  to  1914,  was  born  Feb.  27, 
1869,  at  Deseret,  Utah,  a  son  of  Ed- 
ward Webb  and  Eliza  Ann  Home.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1896,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  July  1,  1906,  by  Oi-son 
F.  Whitney.     He  died  in  1924. 

WHITAKER,  William  Porter,  Bish- 
op of  the  Pocatello  4th  Ward,  Poca- 
tello Stake,  Idaho,  from  1921  to  1924, 
was  born  April  2,  1882,  at  Centerville, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


579 


Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  W.  Whitaker 
and  Hannah  Waddoups.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  6,  1890,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  24,  1912,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards, and  a  Bishop  Feb.  27,  1921,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

WHITING,  Lorenzo  Snow,  Bishop 
of  the  Crystal  Ward,  Pocatello  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1923  to  1930  -f ,  was  born 
Dec.  13,  1883,  in  Springville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Lorenzo  S.  Whiting  and  Flora 
Waterman.  He  was  set  apart  as  Bish- 
op Aug.  12,  1923,  by  Pres.  Heber  J. 
Grant. 


Portneuf  Stake 


BLANCHARD,  Asael  D.,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodland  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1912  to  1915,  was  born 
Jan.  24,  1883,  at  Logan,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Thos.  Blanchard  and  Amelia  Davis. 
He  was  baptized  July  2,  1891,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  Woodland  Ward 
June  22,  1912. 

B  L  A  S  E  R,    Augustine    Frederick, 

Bishop  of  the  Lava  (formerly  Demp- 
sey)  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1909  to  1914,  was  born  Oct.  6, 
1871,  in  Geneva,  Switzerland,  a  son 
of  Frederick  Blaser  and  Elizabeth 
Lark.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  20,  1882, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  17,  1905, 
by  Noah  S.  Pond,  and  a  Bishop  March 
28,  1909,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

BOYCE,  Albert  Myron,  Bishop  of 
the  McCammon  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1902  to  1909,  was  born 
March  16,  1854,  in  Spanish  Fork, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Boyce  and  Mary 
A.  Barzee.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  8,  1902,  by 
Mathias   F.   Cowley. 

BYINGTON,  Charles  Norton,  Bish- 
op of  the  Lava  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1914  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 


March  29,  1868,  in  Calls  Fort,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Joseph  H.  Byington  and 
Hannah  Molland.  He  was  baptized 
June  10,  1877,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  18,  1914,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

CAMPBELL,     Frederick     Henry, 

Bishop  of  the  Lava  Hot  Springs  Ward, 
Portneuf  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to 
1916,  was  born  May  16,  1887,  in  Wes- 
ton, Idaho,  a  son  of  Adam  R.  Camp- 
bell and  Elizabeth  Beebe.  He  was 
baptized  June  1,  1895,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  June  26,  1910,  by  Noah 
S.  Pond,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  19,  1916, 
by   Rudger  Clawson. 

CAPELL,  Joseph  Edward,  Bishop 
of  the  Garden  Creek  Ward,  Poi-tneuf 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1887  to  1906,  was 
born  July  7,  1856,  in  Willenhall,  South 
Staffordshire,  England,  the  son  of 
William  Capell  and  Rose  E.  Bailey 
He  was  baptized  Dec.  22,  1867,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1873,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
7,  1887,  by  Lorenzo  Snow. 

COFFIN,  Nathan  Samuel,  Bishop 
of  the  Marsh  Center  Ward,  Portneuf 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1903  to  1919,  was 
born  Sept.  11,  1870,  in  Huntsville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Nathan  H.  Coffin  and 
Lydia  Ann  Cook.  He  was  baptized 
April  2,  1899,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1900-1901,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  7,  1903. 

COFFIN,  William  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Cambridge  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1891  to  1894,  was  born 
Nov.  15,  1846,  in  Bonaparte,  Iowa,  a 
son  of  Wm.  B.  Coffin  and  Habagle 
Starbuck.  He  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1889,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  6,  1891,  by 
Geo.  C.  Parkinson,  and  died  at  Cam- 
bridge, Idaho. 

DEWEY,  William  Alfred,  Bishop  of 
the  Cambridge  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 


580 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Idaho,  from  1907  to  1915,  was  born 
June  28,  1861,  in  Call's  Fort,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  C.  Dewey  and  Harriet 
May.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
20,  1894,  by  Marriner  W.  Merrill,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  June  16,  1907,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HENDERSON,    Henry    Williams, 

Bishop  of  the  Garden  Creek  Ward, 
Portneuf  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1911  to 
1917,  was  born  Aug.  20,  1875,  in  Lo- 
gan, Utah,  a  son  of  James  Henderson 
and  Mary  Williams.  He  was  baptized 
July  1,  1884,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov. 
6,  1907,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northeni  States  in 
1907-1909,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  16,  1911,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

HENDERSON,    William    Williams, 

first  counselor  in  the  Portneuf  Stake 
presidency,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1917, 
was  born  May  23,  1879,  in  Logan, 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  Henderson  and 
Mary  Williams.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  1911  by  Chas.  F.  Middleton,  and 
acted  as  second  counselor  in  the  Poca- 
tello  Stake  presidency  from  1914  un- 
til the  Portneuf  Stake  was  organized 
Aug.  15,  1915,  when  he  was  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  in  that  Stake  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

HODOWAL,  George  Zerneke,  Bish- 
op of  the  Hawkins  Ward,  Portneuf 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1917  to  1919  and 
from  1920  to  1924,  was  born  Jan.  31, 
1878,  in  Maquoketa,  Iowa,  a  son  of 
Herman  Zerneke  Hodowal  and  Hulda 
Dahling.  He  was  baptized  May  1, 
1909,  came  to  Idaho  in  1902,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  24,  1917,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

HOWELL,  James  William,  Bishop 
of  the  McCammon  Ward,  Portneuf 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1923  to  1930,  was 
born  July  29,  1865,  in  Kaysville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  James  Howell  and  Rosanna 


Monk.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  1,  1873, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  17,  1899, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  9,  1923,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

MERRILL,  Orrin  Preston,  Bishop 
of  the  Downey  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1917,  was  born 
Aug.  5,  1876,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Orrin  J.  Merrill  and  Elizabeth 
White.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  5,  1884, 
ordained  an  Elder  in  January,  1900, 
by  Thomas  Morgan,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1900-1903, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1904 
by  Geo.  C.  Parkinson,  and  a  Bishop 
Nov.  20,  1915,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

MONROE,  Theodore  M.,  Bishop  of 
the  Lava  Hot  Springs  Ward,  Portneuf 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1927,  was 
born  Oct.  1,  1864,  at  Providence,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Marion  M.  Monroe  and  Lu- 
cinda  Busenbark.  He  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Aug.  21,  1920,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

MORRIS,  Parley  M.,  Bishop  of  the 
Merrill  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1930  + ,  was  born  June 
20,  1885,  in  Portage,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  S.  Morris  and  Esther  Williams. 
He  was  baptized  June  20,  1893,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  24,  1919,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith, 

NORTON,  Alanson,  Bishop  of  the 
McCammon  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1895  to  1898  (presiding 
Elder  from  1890  to  1895),  was  born 
March  26,  1814,  in  Granville,  New 
York,  a  son  of  Allen  Norton  and  Lucy 
Wilkinson.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  16, 
1843,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  20, 
1895,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith.  He  died  Aug. 
22,  1904. 

NORTON,  William  Alanson,  Bishop 
of  the  McCammon  Ward,  Portneuf 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1898  to  1901,  was 
born  Aug.  8,  1866,  in  Coalville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Alanson  Norton  and  Julia  A. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


581 


Williams.  He  was  baptized  in  June, 
1873,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  1,  1898,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

OLSON,  Erik  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Virginia  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  10,  1887,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Peter  W.  Olson  and  Anna  E. 
Anderson.  He  was  baptized  in  April, 
1896,  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  24,  1910, 
by  Charles  H.  Hart,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Sweden  in  1910-1913.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  15,  1915, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman  and  a  Bishop 
May  24,  1919,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

ROWSELL,  Arthur  Alvin,  Bishop 
of  the  Lava  Hot  Springs  Ward,  Port- 
neuf Stake,  Idaho,  from  1927  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  9,  1887,  in  Rich- 
mond, Utah,  a  son  of  William  Rowsell 
and  Grace  Lye.  He  was  baptized  June 
6,  1895,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
24,  1923,  by  James  E.  Talmage,  and 
a  Bishop  Feb.  11,  1928,  by  Geo.  Albert 
Smith. 

SORENSEN,  W  i  1  f  o  r  d  Halversen, 

Bishop  of  the  Marsh  Center  Ward, 
Portneuf  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  13,  1887,  in 
Mendon,  Utah,  the  son  of  Christian 
Sorensen  and  Caroline  Halversen.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  16,  1896,  ordained 
an  Elder  Nov.  7,  1910,  by  M.  D.  Bird, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1910-1913,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  10,  1921,  by  Geo.  T.  Hyde, 
and  a  Bishop  in  1924  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

STEPHENSON,   Daniel   Preston, 

Bishop  of  the  Topaz  Ward,  Portneuf 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1918  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  July  29,  1879,  in  Richfield, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Archibald  Stephenson 
and  Susan  Simpkins.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1887,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  in  1904-1905,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  25,  1918,  by 
Anthony  W.  Ivins. 


STODDARD,  William  Henry,  Bish- 
op of  the  Grant  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1917,  was  born 
Nov.  3,  1880,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Geo.  A.  Stoddard  and  Hannah 
E.  Bowman.  He  was  baptized  July  3, 
1890,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
22,  1908,  and  a  Bishop  Nov.  20,  1915, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

THOMAS,  Martin  Adams,  Bishop 
of  the  Downey  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1917  to  1923,  was  born 
Nov.  4,  1875,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Martin  W.  Thomas  and  Eliza 
Adams.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  in  1907, 
by  Charles  H.  Hart,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Eastern  States  in  1908- 
1909.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  9,  1917,  by  Hyrum 
M.  Smith. 

THOMPSON,  William  Orville,  Bish- 
op of  the  Cambridge  Ward,  Portneuf, 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Nov.  24,  1869,  in  Richmond, 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  Thompson 
and  Mary  Ellen  Isaacson.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  22,  1908, 
by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  a  Bishop 
Nov.  20,  1915,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

WAKLEY,  Willard,  Bishop  of  the 
Woodland  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1923  to  1930,  was  born  Feb. 
25,  1880,  at  Woodland,  a  son  of  Henry 
H.  Wakley  and  Mary  Adelia  Barnes. 
He  was  baptized  April  8,  1888,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Central  States  in 
1913-1915,  and  was  oi'dained  a  High 
Priest  May  16,  1915,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  9,  1923. 

WAKLEY,  William  Henry  Harri- 
son, Bishop  of  the  Woodland  Ward, 
Portneuf  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1891  to 
1909,  was  born  March  25,  1843,  in 
Nauvoo,  Illinois,  a  son  of  John  Nelson 
Wakley  and  Polly  Woodland.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  after 


582 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


coming  to  Utah  in  1848,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec. 
5,   1891,  by   Marriner  W.   Merrill, 

WEBB,  George  Edwin,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodland  Ward,  Portneuf  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1915  to  1923,  was  born 
Sept.  16,  1866,  in  Kaysville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Edmund  Webb  and  Elizabeth 
Colemere.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  19,  1909,  by  William  A.  Hyde, 
and  a  Bishop  May  16,  1915,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman. 


Raft  River  Stake 

ALLEN,  David  Orlo,  Bishop  of  the 
Almo  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cassia 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1907  to  1912,  was 
born  April  21,  1872,  in  Huntsville, 
Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Allenson  D. 
Allen  and  Chastina  Hadlock.  He  was 
baptized  May  7,  1880,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  24,  1905,  by  William  T. 
Jack,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  June  10, 
1907,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

BARLOW,  Joseph  Smith,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  Raft 
River  Stake,  Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from 
1921  to  1925,  was  born  Jan.  27,  1870, 
in  Fairfield,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Joseph  Smith  Barlow  and  Amanda 
Morgan.  He  was  baptized  when  nine 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  12, 
1902,  by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1903-1904,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  18,  1915, 
by  John  A.  Elison,  and  set  apart  as 
second  counselor  in  the  Raft  River 
Stake  presidency  Aug.  7,  1921,  by  Mel- 
vin  J.  Ballard. 

BEECHER,  Elihu  Ulysses,  Bishop 
of  the  Elba  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake, 
Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  April  21,  1883,  at  Elba,  Ida- 
ho, a  son  of  Asa  Moroni  Beecher  and 
Clarissa  Paulina  Pethingill.     He  was 


baptized  July  2,  1891,  ordained  an 
Elder  Oct.  1,  1906,  by  his  father,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1906-1907,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  16,  1915,  by  John  A.  Elison,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  June  6,  1926,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

BLACKBURN,  Thomas  Henry  Bark, 

jun.,  Bishop  of  the  Yost  Ward,  Raft 
River  Stake,  Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from 
1903  to  1907,  was  born  Aug.  8,  1877,  in 
Brigham  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas 
H.  Blackburn  and  Roxy  L.  Bigler.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  8,  1886,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1896- 
1898,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  in  October,  1903,  by  Ma- 
thias  F.  Cowley. 

DARRINGTON,  Edward,  Bishop  of 

the  Elba  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cas- 
sia Co.,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1925,  was 
born  Oct.  9,  1887,  at  Elba,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  John  Darrington  and  Sarah  Maria 
Perry.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  10,  1895, 
ordained  an  Elder  Jan.  30,  1910,  by 
John  Darrington,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States  in  1910-1912,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  16,  1915,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

DURFEE,  Lorenzo,  Bishop  of  the 
Almo  Wai'd,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cassia 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1912  to  1918,  was 
born  Aug.  31,  1865,  at  Providence, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Henry  D. 
Durfee  and  Jane  Barker.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  5,  1884,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1904-1906,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  27,  1907, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Aug.  4,  1912. 

ELISON,  John  Alfred,  president  of 
the  Raft  River  Stake,  Cassia  Co.,  Ida- 
ho, from  1915  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  June 
14,  1880,  in  Grantsville,  Tooele  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Alfred  Elison  and 
Sophia  Anderson.  He  was  baptized 
in   September,   1888,  ordained  a  Sev- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


583 


enty  by  John  Henry  Smith,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southwestern  States  in 
1900-1903,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  29,  1903,  by  William  T.  Jack,  and 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  Raft 
River  Stake  April  27,  1915,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

GUNNELL,  Lewis  Jeff,  Bishop  of 
the  Naf  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cas- 
sia Co.,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1929,  was 
born  Dec.  18,  1881,  a  son  of  Francis 
Gunnell  and  Emma  Jeff.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  4,  1889,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  6,  1921, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

HARPER,  Joseph,  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Raft  River  Stake, 
Cassia  Co.,idaho,  from  1915  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  15,  1872,  at  Call's 
Fort,  Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Thomas  Harper  and  Hannah  Jones. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  of  age,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastei-n  States  in  1909-1913,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Heber  J. 
Grant,  and  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
in  the  Raft  River  Stake  presidency 
April  27,  1915,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HUBBARD,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Elba  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cassia 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1910  to  1915,  was 
born  Nov.  30,  1861,  in  Willard,  Box 
Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  Hub- 
bard and  Mary  Edwards.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  17,  1871,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  8,  1897,  by  Moroni  Pickett, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  6,  1910, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

JOHNS,  Walter  Mathias,  Bishop  of 
the  Naf  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cas- 
sia Co.,  Idaho,  from  1913  to  1915,  and 
Bishop  of  the  Almo  Ward,  Raft  River 
Stake,  from  1918  to  1921,  was  born 
April  1,  1875,  in  North  Ogden,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Jonathan  Johns  and  Elizabeth 
Jane  Bishop.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  of  age,  and  ordained 


a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  2,  .1913, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

LOVELAND,  Don  Chester,  Bishop 
of  the  Yost  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake, 
Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1918  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  18,  1889,  in  Albion, 
Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Don  Carlos 
Loveland  and  Eliza  R.  Harper.  He 
was  baptized  March  18,  1897,  filled  a 
mission  to  Turkey  in  1909-1911,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op May  24,  1919,  by  Richard  R.  Ly- 
man. 

LOVELAND,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Albion  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cas- 
sia Co.,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1924,  was 
born  Feb.  20,  1879,  at  Call's  Fort,  Box 
Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Don  Carlos 
Loveland  and  Eliza  Rosetta  Harper. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  10, 
1901,  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Society  Islands  in  1901- 
1904,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
19,  1915,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

MONTGOMERY,   Joseph   Albert, 

Bishop  of  the  Yost  Ward,  Raft  River 
Stake,  Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1907  to 
1918,  was  born  July  15,  1870,  at  North 
Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of  Robert  Mont- 
gomery and  Annie  Chadwick.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  26,  1891,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  October,  1903,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  July  27,  1907,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

NEDDO,  Isaac  James,  jun.,  Bishop 
of  the  Malta  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake, 
Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1916  to  1925, 
was  born  May  1,  1882,  at  St.  John, 
Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Isaac  James 
Neddo  and  Pauline  S.  Burridge.  He 
was  baptized  June  1,  1905,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug.  30,  1914,  by  William 
T.  Jack,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
22,  1916,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

PHIPPEN,  Melvin  Earl,  Bishop  of 
the   Albion   Ward,   Raft   River   Stake, 


584 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1924  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  April  16,  1893,  at  Albion, 
Idaho,  the  son  of  Wilford  F.  Phippen 
and  Emma  L.  Williams.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  22,  1901,  ordained  an  Elder 
Sept.  28,  1913,  by  William  O.  Pratt, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1913-1915,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  26,  1924,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

SANDERS,  Orson  S.,  Bishop  of  the 
Malta  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cas- 
sia Co.,  Idaho,  from  1925  to  1930 -h, 
was  born  Sept.  10,  1886,  in  South  Cot- 
tonwood, Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Orson  Sanders  and  Rosa  Shepherd. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  6,  1897,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
6,  1926,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

SAUNDERS,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Moulton  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cas- 
sia Co.,  Idaho,  from  1916  to  1921,  was 
born  July  6,  1879,  in  Ogden,  Weber 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  George 
Saunders  and  Amelia  Ann  Batchelor. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  24,  1890,  in  Uin- 
tah, Weber  Co.,  Utah,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  23,  1916, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

SIMPER,  Ernest  Daniel,  Bishop  of 
the  Moulton  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake, 
Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1921  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  6,  1874,  in  Murray, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Daniel  Simper  and 
Mary  Ann  Panter.  He  was  baptized 
July  24,  1881,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  23,  1916,  by  John  A.  Elison,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  30,  1921,  by 
George  F.  Richai'ds. 

SORENSEN,  Joseph  N.,  Bishop  of 
the  Naf  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cas- 
sia Co.,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1919,  was 
born  Oct.  2,  1865,  at  Mendon,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Abraham  Soren- 
sen  and  Mary  Jensen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  20,  1874,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  2,  1913,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
27,  1915,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 


TAYLOR,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Elba  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cassia 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1887  to  1910,  was  born 
Sept.  8,  1850,  in  Lee  County,  Iowa,  the 
son  of  Benjamin  Taylor  and  Mary  Ann 
Cole.  He  was  baptized  in  1860,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  24,  1887,  by  John  W.  Taylor.  He 
died  Aug.  26,  1921. 

TAYLOR,  Thomas,  jun.,  Bishop  of 
the  Malta  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake, 
Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1912  to  1915, 
was  born  March  18,  1878,  at  Willard, 
Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Thom- 
as Taylor  and  Elizabeth  Hubbard.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1886,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1901-1903,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  5,  1912,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 

WARD,  Asael  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Almo  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake,  Cassia 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 -h,  was 
born  Oct.  12,  1890,  at  Almo,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  George  A.  Ward  and  Mary  Ellen 
Brewerton.  He  was  baptized  March 
1,  1899,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Dec.  5,  1926,  by  George 
F.  Richards. 

ZOLLINGER,  Aaron  Arthur,  Bishop 
of  the  Malta  Ward,  Raft  River  Stake, 
Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1916, 
and  Bishop  of  the  Sublett  Ward,  in  the 
same  Stake,  from  1916  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Oct.  18,  1883,  in  Providence, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Jacob  Zol- 
linger and  Rosetta  Looslie.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  5,  1891,  in  Providence, 
Utah,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1910-1912,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan,  17,  1916, 
by  George  F.  Richards,  and  sustained 
as  Bishop  of  the  Sublett  Ward  April 
21,  1916. 


Rigby  Stake 


AGREN,  Pehr  Alfred,  Bishop  of  the 
Lewisville  Waid,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


585 


son  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1923  to  1928,  was 
born  Jan.  31,  1877,  at  Harrisville, 
Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Pehr  Agren 
and  Johanna  Felt.  He  was  baptized 
May  10,  1885,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  1,  1913,  by  John  W.  Hart,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  23,  1923,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

BERRETT,  William  Silas,  Bishop 
of  the  Menan  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jef- 
ferson Co.,  Idaho,  from  1917  to  1923, 
was  born  Sept.  2,  1878,  at  North  Og- 
den,  Utah,  a  son  of  Samuel  F.  Berrett 
and  Elizabeth  Mewby.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Jan.  5,  1901,  by 
Jonathan  S.  Kimball,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southwestern  States  in  1901- 
1903,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 
19,  1909,  by  Josiah  Call,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  8,  1917,  by  Pres.  Joseph 

F.  Smith. 

CALL,  John  Omer,  Bishop  of  the 
Rigby  2nd  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 
son Co.,  Idaho,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  16,  1887,  in  Rigby, 
Idaho,  a  son  of  Cyril  J.  Call  and  Mary 
E.  Wood.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  4, 
1895,  ordained  an  Elder  May  5,  1907, 
by  Charles  Call,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1907-1909,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  22,  1923,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Feb.  20,  1927,  by  David  0. 
McKay. 

CAMPBELL,  Wallace,  Bishop  of  the 
Annis  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1924  to  1928,  was  born 
Nov.  30,  1893,  in  Lewisville,  Fremont 
Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Eli  Campbell  and 
Hannah  Ash.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
2,  1902,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  1,  1924,  by  Hyrum 

G.  Smith. 

CARR,  Edwin  Myron,  Bishop  of  the 
Annis  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1916  to  1924,  was 
born  June  3,  1870,  at  Eden,  Weber  Co., 


Utah,  a  son  of  David  Carr  and  Mel- 
vina  A.  Butler.  He  was  baptized  June 
13,  1883,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
5,  1904,  by  Robert  L.  Bybee,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Sept.  2,  1916,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

CLINGER,  John  Williams,  Bishop 
of  the  La  Belle  Ward,  Rigby  Stake, 
Jefferson  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1915tol922, 
was  born  Dec.  3,  1871,  in  Provo,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  H.  dinger 
and  Pauline  Williamson.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  18,  1880,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  28,  1915, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

CORDON,  George  Albert,  Bishop  of 
the  Rigby  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jef- 
ferson Co.,  Idaho,  from  1886  to  1917, 
was  born  Nov.  3,  1860,  at  Willard,  Box 
Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Alfred  Cor- 
don and  Emely  Pridmore.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eleven  years  old, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  22,  1886,  by  John  W.  Taylor. 

DABELL,  Alfred  K.,  Bishop  of  the 
Grant  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1892  to  1906,  was 
born  May  14,  1852,  at  Bradford,  North- 
amptonshire, England,  a  son  of  Alonzo 
Dabell  and  Harriett  Lambert.  He  was 
baptized  May  14,  1860,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  14, 
1892,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

DUTSON,  Richard  Daniel,  Bishop  of 

the  Perry  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 
son Co.,  Idaho,  from  1918  to  1923,  was 
born  Nov.  15,  1865,  in  Fillmore,  Mil- 
lard Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  William 
Dutson  and  Elizabeth  Towley.  He  was 
baptized  in  1873,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  May,  1910,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun.,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
March  3,  1918,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

ERICKSON,  William  Seth,  Bishop 
of  the  Lewisville  Ward,  Rigby  Stake, 
Jefferson  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1928  to 
1930  + ,    was    born    Oct.    8,    1895,    at 


586 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Blackfoot,  Bingham  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  John  Erickson  and  Sarah  Walker. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1905,  ordained 
a  Seventy  Feb.  5,  1921,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1921-1923,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  26,  1928, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

GREEN,    Oscar    William    Greeley, 

Bishop  of  the  Menan  Ward,  Rigby 
Stake,  Jefferson  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1911 
to  1917,  was  born  April  10,  1862,  in 
South  Cottonwood,  Salt  Lake  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Austin  G.  Green  and 
Mary  Ann  Marchant.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  in  1900,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  in  1911. 

GREEN,  Peter  Bertelsen,  Bishop  of 
the  Lewisville  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jef- 
ferson Co.,  Idaho,  from  1913  to  1923, 
was  born  Feb.  4,  1864,  at  Plain  City, 
Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Peter  C. 
Green  and  Elsie  M.  Bertelsen.  He  was 
baptized  in  1872,  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Brigham  H.  Roberts,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1891-1893,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  17, 
1906,  by  Lewis  W.  Shurtliff,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  June  1,  1913,  by  An- 
thony W.  Ivins. 

GROW,  Horace  I.,  Bishop  of  the 
Roberts  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1928,  was 
born  Oct.  8,  1877,  at  Huntsville,  Weber 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  Grow  and 
Esther  Coffin.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
1,  1893,  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op March  5,  1921,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

HALL,  Hubert  Frank,  Bishop  of  the 
Annis  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  13,  1871,  in  Ogden,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Benjamin  Franklin  Hall  and 
Mary  Sorepta  Loke.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  4,  1917,  ordained  a  High  Priest 


March  1,  1924,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  May  26,  1928, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

HARRIS,  Ransom  Enoch,  Bishop  of 
the  Perry  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 
son Co.,  Idaho,  from  1923  to  1930,  was 
born  June  30,  1872,  at  Portage,  Box 
Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Enoch  Har- 
ris and  Jane  A.  Hoskins.  He  was 
baptized  July  19,  1880,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty June  21,  1908,  by  Heber  J.  Grant, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Western  States 
in  1909-1911,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  19,  1908,  by  William  Selch, 
jun.,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  9, 
1923,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HART,  George  Leland,  Bishop  of 
the  Menan  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 
son Co.,  Idaho,  from  1923  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  April  16,  1896,  in  West  We- 
ber, Utah,  a  son  of  John  W.  Hart  and 
Elizabeth  J.  Hogge.  He  was  baptized 
in  1904,  ordained  an  Elder  by  John  W. 
Hart,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1915-1917,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  9, 
1923,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HOLM,  Carl  Paul  Theophelus,  Bish- 
op of  the  Roberts  Ward,  Rigby  Stake, 
Jefferson  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1928  to 
1930  4- ,  was  born  Aug.  8,  1901,  at  Am- 
mon,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Carl  Otto  Holm 
and  Viktorina  Melin.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  4,  1909,  filled  a  mission  to 
Sweden  in  1924-1925,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  31,  1927,  by  George 
Albert  Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  25,  1928,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

JONES,  Joseph  W.,  Bishop  of  the 
Bybee  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1908  to  1911,  was 
born  Aug.  27,  1864,  at  Wilson  Lane, 
Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  E. 
Jones  and  Jane  Nelson.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  nine  years  old,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1896-1898,  and  a  mission  to  Great  Bri- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


587 


tain  in  1906-1908,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  21,  1908, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

KINGHORN,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Lewisville  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 
son Co.,  Idaho,  from  1905  to  1913,  was 
born  May  6,  1862,  at  Bellville,  St.  Clair 
Co.,  Illinois,  a  son  of  Alexander  King- 
horn,  sen.,  and  Jane  Campbell.  He 
was  baptized  May  31,  1874,  and  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  7, 

1905,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

LEE,  Hyrum,  Bishop  of  the  Bybee 
Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson  Co.,  Ida- 
ho, from  1912  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb. 
15,  1878,  at  Huntsville,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Niels  Peter  Lee  and 
Mary  Larson.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
5,  1886,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 

4,  1911,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Nov.  30,  1912,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

LEE,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Grant 
Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson  Co.,  Ida- 
ho, from  1913  to  1930,  was  born  Nov. 
30,  1875,  at  Huntsville,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Niels  Peter  Lee  and 
Mary  Larson.     He  was  baptized  June 

5,  1884,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  2, 

1906,  by  Heber  Andrus,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1910- 
1912,  and  was  sustained  as  Bishop  of 
Grant  Ward  May  25,  1913, 

LUNDQUIST,  Joseph  Lavern,  Bish- 
op of  the  La  Belle  Ward,  Rigby  Stake, 
Jefferson  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1928  to 
1930  4- ,  was  born  Oct.  28,  1903,  at  La 
Belle,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Frank  Lundquist 
and  Matilda  Matson.  He  was  baptized 
July  5,  1913,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  25,  1928,  by 
George  Albert  Smith. 

MOORE,  Clarence  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Rigby  2nd  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 
son Co.,  Idaho,  from  1923  to  1927,  was 
born  Feb.  18,  1884,  at  Wanship,  Sum- 
mit Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  Moore 


and  Sarah  Nixon.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1904- 
1906,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
February,  1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  22,  1923, 
by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

MORGAN,  Joshua  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
La  Belle  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1928,  was  born 
Dec.  9,  1862,  at  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Morgan  and 
Ann  Gillott.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  1, 
1870,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  17, 
1915,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  March  5,  1922,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

MOSS,  Hyrum  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
the  Ririe  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 
son Co.,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1930+ , 
was  born  Aug.  29,  1880,  at  Enterprise, 
Morgan  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Hyrum 
Ralph  Moss  and  Fanny  Wardley. 
He  was  baptized  in  September,  1888, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1919-1921,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op March  5,  1922,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

SEVERSON,  Hyrum,  Bishop  of  the 
Garfield  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jefferson 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1908  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  July  2, 1869,  at  Brinton,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Halvor  Syvertsen 
and  Matea  Evansdatter.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1898,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  5,  1908,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

TERRY,  Zera  Pulsipher,  Bishop  of 
the  Lorenzo  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jef- 
ferson Co.,  Idaho,  from  1917  to  1922. 
was  born  March  16,  1856,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  S.  Terry 
and  Eliza  Jane  Pulsipher.  He  was 
baptized  June  3,  1866,  ordained  an 
Elder  by  George  H.  Crosby,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1879-1881, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Josiah 
Call,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May  27, 
1917,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 


588 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


THOMAS,  Albert  Levi,  Bishop  of 
the  Lorenzo  Waz'd,  Rigby  Stake,  Jef- 
ferson Co.,  Idaho,  from  1922  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  28,  1880,  at  Harris- 
ville,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jacob 
Thomas  and  Mary  Ann  Woodard.  He 
was  baptized  in  June,  1889,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  8,  1917,  by  John 
W.  Hart,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
March  5,  1922,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

WALKER,  Erastus,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Bybee  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jef- 
ferson Co.,  Idaho,  from  1900  to  1908, 
was  born  May  22,  1867,  at  Deseret, 
Millard  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William 
Walker  and  Olive  S.  Bingham.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  and  appointed  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Bybee  Ward  some  time  in  1900. 

WATERS,  Elmer  Evan,  Bishop  of 
the  Clark  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 
son Co.,  Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930,  was 
born  Aug.  8,  1893,  at  Burrville,  Sevier 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  George  B.  Waters 
and  Laura  Ann  Burr.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  3,  1903,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  3,  1918,  by  William  W.  Selck, 
jun.,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  25, 
1928,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

WATERS,  George  Arden,  Bishop  of 
the  Rigby  2nd  Ward,<ligby  Stake,  Jef- 
ferson Co.,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1923, 
was  born  Aug.  28,  1880,  at  Burrville, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  George 
Birch  Waters  and  Laui'a  Ann  Burr. 
He  was  baptized  June  6,  1889,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  2,  1917,  by 
George  F.  Richards,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Feb.  29,  1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

WESTERBERG,  Carl  G.,  Bishop  of 
the  Clark  Ward,  Rigby  Stake,  Jeffer- 
son Co.,  Idaho,  from  1908  to  1910,  was 
born  June  16,  1871,  at  Hyrum,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Carl  P.  Westerberg 
and  Annie  E.  Peterson.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  6,  1885,  ox'dained  a  Seventy 
Nov.  9,  1898,  by  J.  G.  Kimball,  filled  a 


mission  to  the  Western  States  in  1898- 
1901,  and  was  sustained  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  July  5,  1908. 


Roosevelt  Stake 

ALLRED,  Louis  Ephraim,  Bishop  of 
the  Hayden  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1920,  was  born  Oct. 
2,  1878,  in  Chester,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Ephraim  L.  Allred  and  Har- 
riet B.  Bronson.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
7,  1886,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwestern 
States,  in  1910-1912,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept,  15, 
1917,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

ANGUS,  John  Alexander,  Bishop  of 
the  loka  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1912  to  1920,  was  born  Sept.  14, 
1862,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Angus  and  Betsy  Hislop. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  4,  1872,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept. 
23,  1912,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

BAHR,    Albert   Andrew,   Bishop   of 

the  Cedarview  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
May  24,  1884,  in  Lehi,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Andreas  Bahr  and 
Harriet  Jackson.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  16,  1893,  and  was  oi'dained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  4,  1928, 
by  David  O.  McKay. 

BENNION,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Roosevelt  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919-1920,  and  of  the 
Roosevelt  2nd  Ward,  in  1920,  was  born 
Feb.  1,  1865,  in  Vernon,  Tooele  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Bennion  and  Es- 
ther Ann  Birch.  He  was  baptized 
March  23,  1873,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1887-1889,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  28,  1919,  by  Anthony 
W.  Ivins.  When  the  Roosevelt  Ward 
was  divided  June  26,  1920,  he  was  set 
apart  to  preside  over  the  Roosevelt 
2nd  Ward  by  Rudger  Clawson. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


589 


BENSON,  Melvin  Jeremiah,  Bishop 
of  the  loka  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1928,  was  born 
Jan.  10,  1886,  in  Woodland,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  Jeremiah  Benson  and  Lois 
Sylvira  Turnbow.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  3,  1896,  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1911-1913,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  19,  1915,  by  George  F. 
Richards,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
26,  1920,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

BODILY,    Christopher    William, 

Bishop  of  the  Moffat  Ward,  Roosevelt 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Jan.  20,  1884,  in  Vernal,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Robert  Bodily  and  Hai'riet  Ann 
Roberts.  He  was  baptized  May  21, 
1892,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1909-1911,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  17,  1921,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

BOLTON,  John  Gilbert,  Bishop  of 
the  Bennett  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  19,  1876,  in  Mill  Creek,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  G.  Bolton 
and  Priscilla  Osguthorpe.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  8,  1884,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1899-1901,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  13,  1914,  by 
Ephraim  Lambert,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  March  22,  1925,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

BURGESS,  Ernest  Hungate,  Bishop 
of  the  Roosevelt  1st  Ward,  Roosevelt 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1929,  was 
born  Jan.  3,  1884,  in  Pine  Valley, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  George 
Martin  Burgess  and  RhodaAnn  Dykes. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  of 
age,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  Germany  in  1904-1907, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  17, 
1922,  by  George  F.  Richards,  and  oi*- 
dained  a  Bishop  June  17,  1923,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 


DILLMAN,  Ray  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Roosevelt  W  a  rd  ,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  22,  1890,  in  Vernal,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Simon  Peter  Dillman  and  Julia  El- 
len Davis.  He  was  baptized  June  4, 
1898,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northwestern  States 
in  1918-1920,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  Richard  R.  Lyman,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  5,  1929,  by 
George  F.  Richards. 

ELDREDGE,  Joseph  Harold,  Bish- 
op of  the  Myton  Ward,  Roosevelt 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1930  4-,  was 
born  Dec.  19,  1890,  in  Coalville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Ira  E.  Eldredge  and  Sarah 
Burr  Staker.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
27,  1899,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  17,  1923,  by  James  E. 
Talmage. 

HANSON,  Paul  Soren,  Bishop  of 
the  Roosevelt  1st  Ward,  Roosevelt 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1923,  was 
born  April  25, 1875,  in  Fountain  Green, 
Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Soren 
Hansen  and  Maren  Mortensen.  He 
was  baptized  May  2,  1883,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States  in  1917-1919,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  William  H. 
Smart,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
26,    1920,    by    Rudger    Clawson. 

HORROCKS,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the 
Bennett  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1913  to  1924,  was  born  Dec.  7, 
1873,  in  Heber,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Roger  Horrocks  and  Sarah  Ann 
Taylor.  He  was  baptized  in  1881,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  21,  1913,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

HORROCKS,  Roger,  Bishop  of  the 
Hayden  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1911  to  1917,  was  born  Dec.  23, 
1871,  in  Heber,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Roger  Horrocks  and  Sarah 
A.  Taylor.     He  was  ordained  a  High 


590 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Priest  Dec.  4,  1910,  by  William  H. 
Smart,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
10,  1911,  by  Francis   M.  Lyman. 

JENSEN,  Lionel  Christian,  Bishop 
of  the  Neola  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  May  13, 
1900,  in  Goshen,  Utah,  a  son  of  Chris- 
tian Jensen  and  Martena  Halverson. 
He  was  baptized  May  16,  1908,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  22,  1925, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman,  and  ordained 
Bishop  May  10,  1930,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

JORGENSEN,  Elmer  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Alterra  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1929,  was  born 
March  10,  1886,  in  Smithfield,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Jacob  Jorgensen  and  Melvina 
M.  Munk.  He  was  baptized  May  3, 
1894,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  22, 
1914,  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  sustained 
as  Bishop  July  17,  1927.  He  died  April 
19,  1929. 

LAMBERT,  Dan,  Bishop  of  the 
Roosevelt  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1911,  was  born 
March  2,  1861,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Lambert  and  Elina  H. 
Larsen.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  5,  1878, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1893-1895,  and  was  sustained  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  20,  1908. 

LAMBERT,  Ephraim,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Roosevelt  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  4,  1858,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Lambert  and  Elina 
H.  Larsen.  He  was  baptized  in  1867, 
chosen  as  first  counselor  June  26, 
1920,  and  was  set  apart  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

LAMBERT,  Joseph  Heber,  Bishop 
of  the  Roosevelt  Ward,  Roosevelt 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1914  to  1919,  was 
born  Oct.  27,  1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,   a   son    of   John    Lambert  and 


Elina  Hansene  Larsen.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Netherlands  in  1889- 
1892,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct. 
7,  1914,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

MUSSER,  Frederick  S.,  Bishop  of 
the  Midview  Ward,  Duchesne  Stake, 
from  1913  to  1915,  and  of  the  Myton 
Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1915  to  1918,  was  born  Oct.  1,  1878, 
in  Lake  View,  Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  A.  Milton  Musser  and  Annie  Seeg- 
miller.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  10,  1886, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  21,  1913,  by  James  E.  Talmage, 
and  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Myton 
Ward  Sept.  19,  1915. 

OLSEN,  John  Albert,  Bishop  of  the 
Neola  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1916  to  1925,  was  born  Aug.  8, 
1876,  in  Spring  City,  Sanpete  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Martin  Olsen  and  Chris- 
tina Christensen.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  4,  1886,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  11,  1915,  by  Ephraim  Lambert, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  24,  1916, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

PACK,  John  Austin,  Bishop  of  the 
Roosevelt  2nd  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1929,  was  born 
May  13,  1871,  in  Kamas,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Ward  E.  Pack  and  Laura  Cravath. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1880,  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Society  Islands  in  1906- 
1907,  and  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1913-1915,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  20,  1908,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  17,  1921, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

RICHARDSON,  Ovey  Albert,  Bish- 
op of  the  Montwel  Ward,  Roosevelt 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Dec.  24,  1886,  in  Woodland,  Sum- 
mit Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  W.  Rich- 
ardson and  Maria  Anderson.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  18,  1895,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  16, 
1924,  by  Joseph  F,   Smith,  jun. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


591 


RUDY,  Josiah  Philip,  Bishop  of  the 
Alterra  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1918  to  1920,  was  born  April  9, 
1864,  at  Sharon  Springs,  Snyder  Co., 
Pennsylvania,  a  son  of  Josiah  Henry 
Rudy  and  Matilda  Renninger.  He  was 
baptized  April  28,  1891,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  30,  1918,  by  Heber 
J.  Grant,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
29,  1918,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

RUSSELL,  Simeon  A.,  Bishop  of 
the  Cedarview  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1913  to  1918,  was  born 
Oct.  10,  1875,  in  Fillmore,  Millard  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Allen  Russell  and  Flora 
A.  Howd.  He  was  baptized  July  3, 
1884,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  21,  1913,  by  James  E. 
Talmage. 

TODD,  Thomas  Richardson,  Bishop 
of  the  Cedarview  Ward,  Roosevelt 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1918  to  1928,  was 
born  Aug.  1,  1883,  in  Heber  City,  Was- 
atch Co.,,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  Todd 
and  Harriet  B.  Richardson.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  15,  1892,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  8,  1912,  by  William 
H.  Smart,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
14,   1918,  by  Heber  J.   Grant. 

TODD,  William  Russell,  Bishop  of 
the  Alterra  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930,  was  born 
May  1,  1893,  in  Heber  City,  Wasatch 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  Todd,  jun., 
and  Harriet  B.  Richardson.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  31,  1901,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Canada 
in  1925-1926,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  20,  1926,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May  6, 
1929,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

WAHLQUIST,    Charles    Frederick, 

Bishop  of  the  Randlett  Ward,  Roose- 
velt Stake,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Jan.  18,  1898,  in  Daniels,  Was- 
atch Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  J. 
Wahlquist  and  Elizabeth  Campbell. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  3,  1906,  ordained 


a  High  Priest  March  22,  1925,  by  Fred- 
erick S.  Musser  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Nov.  4,  1928,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

WALL,    Lawrence    Constantine, 

Bishop  of  the  Randlett  Ward,  Roose- 
velt Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1928, 
was  born  Aug.  20,  1885,  in  Big  Cotton- 
wood, Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  J.  Wall 
and  Hedvig  T.  Petersen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  20,  1893,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  18,  1920,  by  Ephraim 
Lambert,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
18,  1921,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

WEBB,  John  Edmund,  Bishop  of 
the  loka  Ward,  Roosevelt  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug. 
8,  1886,  in  Woodland,  Summit  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Ether  Webb  and  Emma 
S.  Jones.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1, 
1894,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  27, 
1911,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  4, 
1928,  by  David  O.  McKay. 


St.  George  Stake 

ANGELL,  Solomon,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Leeds  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1869  to  1876,  was  born 
April  21,  1806,  at  Florence,  Oneida 
Co.,  N.  Y.  He  was  baptized  in  1834, 
came  to  Utah  in  1848,  and  was  ap- 
pointed presiding  Elder  May  9,  1869, 
by  Erastus  Snow.  He  died  Sept.  20, 
1881. 

ASHBY,  Nathaniel,  jun.,  Bishop  of 
the  St.  George  4th  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1869  to  1877,  was 
born  May  25,  1835,  in  Salem,  Mass., 
a  son  of  Nathaniel  Ashby  and  Susan 
A.  Hammond.  He  was  baptized  by 
Erastus  Snow,  filled  a  mission  to  Ha- 
waii in  1881-1882,  and  died  at  sea  one 
and  one-half  days  out  of  San  Fran- 
cisco early  in  1882,  on  his  return  from 
his  mission. 

BAKER,  William  Benson,  Bishop  of 
the  Central  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 


692 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  from  1918  to  1924,  was  born 
May  22,  1862,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  a 
son  of  George  Baker  and  Mary  Ann 
Randall.  He  was  baptized  in  1870, 
filled  a  mission  to  Ireland  in  1899- 
1901,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 
14,  1902,  by  Edward  H.  Snow,  and 
set  apart  as  Bishop  April  24,  1918. 

BENTLEY,    William     Oscar,    jun., 

first  counselor  in  the  St.  George  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930, 
was  born  Aug.  17,  1884,  in  St.  George, 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  Oscar  Bentley 
and  Mary  Ann  Mansfield.  He  was  bap- 
tized Nov.  8,  1892,  ordained  an  Elder 
Jan.  7,  1906,  by  James  McArthur, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1906-1908,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  18,  1923,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards,  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  stake  presidency  by  An- 
thony W.  Ivins  in  1925.  He  became 
stake  president  in   1931. 

CANNON,  Walter,  second  counsel- 
or in  the  St.  George  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930,  was  born 
July  5,  1888,  in  Pinto,  Utah,  a  son  of 
David  Henry  Cannon  and  Rhoda  Ann 
Knell.  He  was  baptized  July  7,  1896, 
filled  a.  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1913-1915,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  September,  1916,  by  Anthony 
W.  Ivins.  He  was  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  June  14,  1925,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards. 

COVINGTON,  Robert  Duchey,  Bish- 
op of  the  Washington  Ward,  St. 
George  Stake,  Utah,  from  1858  to 
1869,  was  born  Aug.  20,  1815,  in  North 
Carolina,  a  son  of  Thomas  D.  Coving- 
ton and  Jane  Thomas.  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  3,  1843,  came  to  Nauvoo 
in  1845,  and  to  the  Valley  in  1847,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  1,  1858, 
by  Geo.  A.  Smith. 

FAWCETT,  Nephi  Robert,  Bishop 
of  the  Price  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from   1881   to   1904,  was   born 


March  12,  1842,  in  York,  Yorkshire, 
England,  a  son  of  William  Fawcett 
and  Jane  Southwell.  He  was  baptized 
in  1850,  after  coming  to  the  Valley, 
and  went  to  St.  George  in  1861.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  England  in  1866- 
1868,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  20,  1881,  by  Erastus 
Snow.     He  died  March  23,  1921. 

FAWCETT,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
St.  George  1st  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1878  to  1879,  was 
born  Dec.  13,  1814,  in  Malton,  York- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  Geoi'ge  Faw- 
cett and  Mary  Spink.  He  was  bap- 
tized Jan.  1,  1840,  and  labored  as  a 
missionai-y  before  coming  to  Utah  in 
1850.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  4,  1853,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  was 
called  to  the  Dixie  Mission  in  1861, 
and  was  acting  Bishop  for  six  months. 
He  died  at  St.  George  Jan.  17,  1904. 

FREEMAN,  John  Woodruff,  Bish- 
op of  the  Washington  Ward,  St. 
George  Stake,  Utah,  from  1869  to 
1877,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bi.shop  Nov.  28,  1869,  by  Erastus 
Snow. 

FREI,  Edward  Rudolph,  Bishop  of 
the  Santa  Clara  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1912  to  1927,  was 
born  Sept.  25,  1867,  in  Santa  Clara,  a 
son  of  Rudolph  Frei  and  Margarette 
Nageli.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  4,  1875, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  29,  1901, 
by  Abraham  O.  Woodruff,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  in  1912. 

FREI,  Vivian  Jacob,  Bishop  of  the 
Santa  Clara  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  9,  1893,  in  Santa  Clara,  a  son 
of  Jacob  Frei  and  Lena  Reber.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1916-1918,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  March  19,  1927,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


593 


FULLER,  Wyllys  Darwin,  Bishop 
of  the  Leeds  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1875  to  1876,  was  born 
Nov.  10,  1835,  in  Wyndham,  Green 
Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Elijah  K.  Fuller 
and  Harriet  Loomis.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Geo.  A. 
Smith  March  17,  1875.  He  died  in 
Arizona   June    13,    1920. 


of  Erik  G.  M.  Hogan  and  Helga 
Knudsen.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  12, 
1843,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1848,  hav- 
ing come  from  Norway  in  1837  and 
settled  in  Nauvoo,  111.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  Norway  in  1877-1879,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op April  13,  1877.  He  died  Jan.  30, 
1898. 


FUNK,  Marcus,  Bishop  of  the 
Washington  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1881  to  1888,  was  born 
Dec.  3,  1842,  at  Eskegaard,  on  the 
island  of  Bornholm,  Denmark,  a  son 
of  Diderick  Funk  and  Kirstine  Madsen. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  March  21, 
1881,  by  Pres.  Wilford  Woodruff.  He 
died  Nov.  19,  1926,  in  Trenton,  Utah. 

HAFEN,  Johan  Georg,  jun.,  Bishop 
of  Santa  Clara  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1884  to  1912,  was 
born  Oct.  17,  1838,  in  Scherzingen, 
Canton  Thurgau,  Switzerland,  a  son 
of  Johan  G.  Hafen  and  Marie  Magda- 
lene Hafen.  He  was  baptized  April 
17,  1860,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1861, 
filled  a  six  months'  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1877,  and  a  mis- 
sion to  Switzerland  and  Germany  in 
1882-1884.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  9,  1884,  by 
Erastus  Snow. 

HARRISON.  Heber  Eldridge,  Bish- 
op of  the  Pinto  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1902  to  1906,  was 
born  May  12,  1874,  in  Pinto,  a  son  of 
John  H.  Harrison  and  Ellen  E.  Eld- 
ridge. He  was  baptized  May  12, 1882, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  7,  1898,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southwestern  States  in  1898-1901, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  14,  1902,  by  Mathias  F. 
Cowley. 

HOGAN,  G  o  u  d  y,  Bishop  of  the 
Leeds  Ward,  St.  George  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1876  to  1877,  was  born  Sept.  16, 
1829,   in   Telemarken,   Norway,  a   son 


HOLT,  Franklin  Overton,  Bishop  of 
the  Gunlock  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1887  to  1918,  was  born 
July  31,  1852,  on  the  Platte  River,  in 
Nebraska,  a  son  of  James  Holt  and 
Parthenia  Overton.  He  was  baptized 
in  Virgin  City,  in  1865,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Dec.  23,  1887,  by 
Erastus  Snow.    He  died  Nov.  10,  1929. 

IVERSON,  Victor  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Washington  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 -|-,  was  born 
March  7,  1897,  in  Washington,  a  son 
of  Edward  M.  Iverson  and  Eveline 
Boggs.  He  was  baptized  June  30, 
1906,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  13, 
1924,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  and  a 
Bishop  Sept.  20,  1925,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

JONES,  Frederic  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Pine  Valley  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1878  to  1888,  was 
born  Oct.  7,  1842,  in  Devonshire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  William  Jones  and  Ann 
Dovell.  He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1856, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  13,  1878,  by  Erastus 
Snow. 

JUDD,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the  St. 
George  1st  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1879  to  1896,  was  born 
Sept.  1,  1846,  in  Birkenhead,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  Samuel  Judd  and  Cath- 
erine Hind.  He  was  baptized  in  1864, 
came  to  Utah  that  same  year,  filled 
a  mission  to  England  in  1876-1878, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  March  14, 
1879,  by  Erastus  Snow.  He  died  June 
7,  1922. 


Vol.  IV,  No.  38 


Sept.  19,  1936 


694 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


KNELL,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the  Pin- 
to Ward,  St.  George  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1876  to  1897,  was  born  Sept.  22,  1828, 
in  Millbrook,  near  Southampton,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  John  C.  Knell  and 
Rhoda  Fry.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  17, 
1848,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1850,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op June  18,  1877,  by  Wilford  Woodruff. 


MILES,  Franklin  Godbe,  Bishop  of 
the  St.  George  South  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930,  was 
born  April  7,  1865,  in  St.  George,  a  son 
of  Samuel  Miles  and  Hannah  M.  Col- 
burn.  He  was  baptized  April  30,  1873, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  10,  1907, 
by  Geo.  F.  Whitehead,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  20,  1925,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 


KNELL,  Robert  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Pinto  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1897  to  1903,  was  born 
Jan.  1,  1861,  at  Kaysville,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Robert  Knell  and  Mary  Crook.  He 
was  baptized  when  nine  years  old,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Nov.  12,  1887,  by 
Horace  S.  Eldredge,  filled  a  mission 
to  England  in  1887-1889,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Sept.  15,  1897,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

McARTHUR,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
St.  George  West  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1902  to  1925,  was 
born  Jan.  29,  1871,  in  St.  George,  a 
son  of  Daniel  D.  McArthur  and  Eliza- 
beth Bullock.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1899-1901,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Dec.  14,  1902,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

McARTHUR,      Wilford      Woodruff, 

Bishop  of  the  St.  George  West  Ward, 
St.  George  Stake,  Utah,  from  1925 
to  1930,  was  born  April  30,  1884,  in 
St.  George,  a  son  of  Daniel  D.  Mc- 
Arthur and  Mary  F.  Calloway.  He 
was  baptized  May  10,  1892,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept. 
20,  1925,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

McMULLIN,  Ira  Edward,  Bishop  of 
the  Leeds  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 -h,  was  born 
Aug.  30,  1888,  in  Leeds,  a  son  of  Ira 
L.  McMullin  and  Helen  Leany.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1896,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Nov.  24,  1912,  by  Ed- 
ward H.  Snow,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  23, 
1928,  by  David  O.  McKay. 


NICHOLES,  Joseph  Kelly,  presi- 
dent of  the  St.  George  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930,  was  born  Oct.  10, 
1887,  in  American  Fork,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Nicholes  and  Eleanor 
Kelly.  He  was  baptized  in  1895,  filled 
a  mission  to  Denmark  in  1909-1912, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  St. 
George  Stake  June  14,  1925,  by  Pres. 
Heber  J.  Grant, 

PAXMAN,  Arthur  Alfred,  Bishop 
of  the  Washington  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1925,  was 
born  Oct.  13,  1865,  in  Bishopsford, 
England,  the  son  of  David  P.  Paxman 
and  Elizabeth  A.  Blunden.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  23,  1880,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  21,  1924,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard.  He  died  March  28,  1925,  in 
Washington,  Utah. 

ROMNEY,  Miles  Park,  Bishop  of 
the  St.  George  1st  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1878,  was 
born  Aug.  18,  1843,  in  Nauvoo,  111., 
a  son  of  Miles  and  Elizabeth  Romney. 
He  was  baptized  in  1851,  ordained  a 
Seventy  in  May,  1862,  and  filled  a 
mission  to  England  in  1862-1865.  He 
was  chosen  as  Bishop  of  the  St.  George 
1st  Ward  April  17,  1877. 

SNOW,  Karl  Nelson,  Bishop  of  the 
St.  George  East  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930,  was 
born  Jan.  17,  1894,  in  St.  George,  a 
son  of  Edward  H.  Snow  and  Hannah 
Nelson.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  11, 
1902,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


595 


Bishop    Sept.    20,    1925,    by    Rudger 
Clawson. 

SPROUL,  Andrew,  Bishop  of  the 
Washington  Ward,  St.  George  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1888  to  1908,  was  born 
Aug.  28,  1842,  in  Paisley,  Renfrew, 
Scotland,  a  son  of  Andrew  Sproul  and 
Mary  McSpurrin.  He  was  baptized 
in  Scotland,  came  to  Utah  in  1862, 
from  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  17, 
1888,  by  John  W.  Taylor.  He  died 
April  25,  1886. 

STIRLING,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Leeds  Ward,  St.  George  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1913  to  1928,  was  born  July  23, 
1885,  in  Leeds,  a  son  of  William  Stir- 
ling and  Sarah  Ann  Laney.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  7,  1893,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  14, 
1913,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

TERRY,  Charles  Alphonzo,  Bishop 
of  the  St.  George  3rd  Ward,  St.  George 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1878  to  1890,  was 
born  Nov.  10,  1821,  in  Richfield,  N.  Y., 
the  son  of  Otis  Terry  and  Cynthia 
Ruggles.  He  was  baptized  in  1843, 
came  to  Utah  in  1850,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  April  17,  1877,  by  Wil- 
ford  Woodruff,  and  a  Bishop  June  16, 
1878,  by  Erastus  Snow.  He  died  April 
14,  1908. 


St.  Johns  Stake 


ASHCROFT,  Josiah  Emer,  Bishop 
of  the  Ramah  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Ariz.,  from  1908  to  1914,  was  born 
Sept.  7,  1865,  in  Hyde  Park,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Henry  Ashcroft  and  Elizabeth 
Ann  Barton.  He  was  baptized  July 
12,  1874,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
22,  1908,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

BLOOMFIELD,   Richard   Henry, 

Bishop  of  the  Ramah  Ward,  St.  Johns 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1919  to  1929,  was 
born  March   6,    1873,   in   Hyde   Park, 


Utah,  a  son  of  John  Bloomfield  and 
Elizabeth  A.  Barton.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  15,  1881,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  20,  1919, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

BLOOMFIELD,    Alexander    Finley, 

Bishop  of  the  Ramah  Ward,  St.  Johns 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1916  to  1919,  was 
born  Aug.  4,  1887,  in  Juarez,  Mexico, 
a  son  of  John  Bloomfield  and  Eliza- 
beth A.  Barton.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
3,  1895,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Aug.  6,  1916,  by  Geo.  Al- 
bert Smith. 

BROWN,  Benjamin,  presiding  Eld- 
er of  the  Nutriosa  Branch,  St.  Johns 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1887  to  1889,  was 
born  March  22,  1845,  in  Nauvoo,  Illi- 
nois, a  son  of  Lorenzo  Brown  and 
Frances  Crosby.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  July  24,  1887,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.     He  died  Aug.  8,  1919. 

BROWN,  John  W.,  second  counselor 
in  the  St.  Johns  Stake  presidency, 
Arizona,  from  1915  to  1922,  was  born 
Nov.  2,  1858,  in  Kaysville,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Thomas  D,  Brown  and  Mary  L. 
Willes.  He  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1886-1888,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  19,  1905,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  May,  1915,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards.  He  died  Nov.  3,  1926,  at  St. 
Johns,  Arizona. 

BROWN,  Lorenzo  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Nutriosa  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1889  to  1896,  was  born 
May  20,  1854,  ia  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Lorenzo  Brown  and  Frances 
Crosby.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  8,  1890,  by  John 
Henry  Smith.     He  died  Dec.  22,  1935. 

BURK,  Joseph  Spencer,  Bishop  of 
the  Nutriosa  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Dec.  14,  1877,  in  Sunset,  Arizona, 


596 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


a  son  of  Hubert  R.  Burk  and  Lois 
Hamblin.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Oct.  22,  1919,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

BURK,  William  Isaiah,  Bishop  of 
the  Alpine  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Ariz.,  from  1904  to  1908,  was  born 
Nov.  28,  1874,  in  Farmington,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Hubei't  Rosell  Burk  and 
Lois  Hamblin.  He  was  baptized  Dec. 
11,  1882,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  14,  1904. 

CHRISTOFFERSEN,     Peter     J.. 

Bishop  of  the  Eagar  Ward,  St.  Johns 
Stake,  Ariz.,  from  1880  to  1883,  was 
born  Feb.  16,  1843,  in  Denmark.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Sept.  20,  1880,  by  Erastus  Snow. 
He  died  Feb.  3,  1910. 

CLAWSON,  Louis  Wayne,  Bishop 
of  the  Ramah  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  March  22,  1901,  in  Fruitland, 
New  Mexico,  a  son  of  W.  W.  Clawson 
and  Minnie  Kirk.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1926-1928, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  5,  1929,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

EAGAR,  John  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
the  Eagar  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1884  to  1886,  was  born 
Dec.  20,  1851,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Eagar  and  Sariah  Anna 
Johnson.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Jan.  6,  1884,  by  Jesse  N.  Smith. 

GIBBONS,  LeRoy,  first  counselor 
in  the  presidency  of  the  St.  Johns 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Sept.  4,  1872,  in  Glendale, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Andrew  S.  Gibbons  and 
Rizpah  Knight.  He  was  baptized  May 
5,  1881,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
4,  1893,  by  Wm.  H.  Gibbons,  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  5,  1901,  and  presided 
over  the  Concho  Ward.  He  also  served 
as  Bishop  of  the  St.  Johns  Ward  from 


1910  to  1915,  and  acted  as  second 
counselor  in  the  Stake  presidency  from 
1922  to  1929  (Feb.  3),  when  he  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

HALL,    Ashley    Moroni,    Bishop    of 

the  Eagar  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Dec.  23,  1881,  in  Vernal,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  Oscar  Hall  and  Lucy  Ann 
Prisby.  He  was  baptized  May  29, 1894, 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  28,  1910,  by 
Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1912- 
1914.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  23,  1914,  by  David  0.  McKay, 
and  a  Bishop  May  3,  1922,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

GREER,  Gilbert  Dunlap,  Bishop  of 
the  Luna  (Heber)  Ward,  St.  Johns 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1888  to  1895, 
was  born  Jan.  20,  1860,  in  Bosque 
County,  Texas,  the  son  of  Thomas  L. 
Greer  and  Catherine  E.  Camp.  He 
was  baptized  May  2,  1878,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Lamanites  in  1879-1880, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Sept.  9,  1888,  by  John  Henry 
Smith. 

HAMBLIN,  Duane,  Bishop  of  the 
Ramah  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake,  Ariz- 
ona, from  1914  to  1916,  was  boi'n  Aug. 
10,  1863,  in  Washington,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Wm.  H.  Hamblin  and  Betsey 
Leavitt.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Aug.  23,  1914,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

HAMBLIN,  Frederick,  Bishop  of 
the  Alpine  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1890  to  1891,  was  born 
Feb.  12,  1841,  in  Spring  Prairie,  Wis- 
consin, the  son  of  Isaiah  Hamblin  and 
Daphne  Haynes.  He  was  baptized  in 
1850,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
a  Bishop  in  1890  by  David  K.  Udall. 

HAMBLIN,  Jacob,  jun.,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  St.  Johns  Stake  presi- 
dency,   Arizona,    from    1922    to    1929, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


597 


was  born  March  21,  1865,  in  Santa 
Clara,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jacob  Hamblin 
and  Sarah  Priscilla  Leavitt.  He  was 
baptized  in  June,  1873,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  8,  1890,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  March  20, 
1897,  by  Heber  J.  Grant.  He  presided 
over  the  Nutriosa  Ward  from  1897  to 
1901,  and  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  St.  Johns  Stake  presi- 
dency April  30,  1922,  by  Rud??er  Claw- 
son. 

HEYWOOD,  Joseph  Neal,  Bishop  of 
the  Alpine  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1891  to  1896,  was  born 
Nov.  18,  1851,  in  Nephi,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Jos.  L.  Heywood  and  Martha 
Spence.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  an  Elder  July  17, 
1875,  by  Wm.  J.  Smith,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  New  Zealand  in  1888-1891,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Sept.  5,  1891,  by  David  K.  Udall. 

JEPSON,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Al- 
pine Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
25,  1868,  in  Fountain  Green,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Martin  Olsen  Jepson  and 
Hannah  Anderson.  He  was  baptized 
June  7,  1877,  filled  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land in  1897-1899,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  by  David  K.  Udall,  and  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  1,  1921,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

KEMPE,  Christopher  J.,  Bishop  of 
the  Concho  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Ariz.,  from  1886  to  1895,  was  born 
June  26,  1837,  in  Isterod,  Frederiks- 
borg  amt,  Denmark,  the  son  of  Jens 
Rasmussen  and  Anne  Kirstine  Kempe. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  16,  1859,  ordain- 
ed to  the  Priesthood,  did  local  mission- 
ary work  in  Denmark  and  came  to 
Utah  in  1866.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  29,  1886,  by 
Erastus  Snow.    He  died  Sept.  30,  1901. 

LOVE,  David,  Bishop  of  the  Nutri- 
osa Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake,  Arizona, 


from  1913  to  1919,  was  born  April  30, 
1876,  in  Midway,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  H.  Love  and  Louisa  Pierson. 
He  was  baptized  in -1884,  and  suc- 
ceeded Orson  Wilkins  as  Bishop  of 
the  Nutriosa  Ward  in  1913. 

McNEIL,  James  Reed,  Bishop  of  the 
Ramah  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake,  Ariz- 
ona, from  1886  to  1894,  was  born  Oct. 
24,  1854,  in  Tranent,  Heddington- 
shire,  Scotland,  a  son  of  Thomas  Mc- 
Neil and  Jenett  Reed.  He  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1856,  was  baptized  Nov. 
13,  1864,  in  Logan,  Utah,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Dec.  4,  1886, 
by  Jesse  N.  Smith. 

NOBLE,  Edward  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Alpine  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake,  Ariz- 
ona, from  1880  to  1890,  was  born  Feb. 
2,  1841,  in  Montrose,  Iowa,  a  son  of 
Joseph  B.  Noble  and  Mary  Adeline 
Belman.  He  was  baptized  in  1850, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op by  Brigham  Young,  jun.,  Sept.  26, 
1880.  He  died  Nov.  28,  1909,  in  St. 
Johns,  Arizona. 

RENCHER,  William  David,  second 
counselor  in  the  St.  Johns  Stake  presi- 
dency, Arizona,  from  1905  to  1915, 
was  born  Jan.  24,  1863,  in  Santa  Clara, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Umpstead  Rencher  and 
Elizabeth  J.  Phillpott.  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  4,  1884,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1892-1894,  and 
a  second  mission  in  1898-1900,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  20,  1905, 
by  David  K.  Udall,  and  three  months 
later  (Nov.  17,  1905)  was  appointed 
second  counselor  in  the  St.  Johns 
Stake  presidency  and  set  apart  by 
Fi-ancis  M.  Lyman. 

REYNOLDS,  Amasa  Owen,  Bishop 
of  the  Luna  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1919  to  1930,  was  born 
July  2,  1879,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Braman  Reynolds  and  Gertrude 
Van   Etten.     He   was   baptized   when 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  19.  1905.  by  Rudger  Clawson. 
and  a  Bishop  Oct.  21,  1919,  by  Meh-in 
J.  Ballard. 

REYNOLDS,  William  Henry.  Bish- 
op of  the  Luna  Ward.  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1S98  to  1903  and  from 
1913  to  1919.  was  bom  Nov.  1,  1S5S, 
in  Shropshire,  England,  a  son  of  John 
Reynolds  and  Elizabeth  Morris.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  1.  1S66.  in  Newark, 
New  Jersey,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  18SS  and  a  Bishop  in  February. 
1898,  by  John  Henry  Smith.  He  had 
acted  as  presiding  Elder  since  Aug. 
15,  1895. 

SMITH,  Asahel  Henry.  Bishop  of 
the  Hunt  Ward.  St.  Johns  Stake,  Ariz- 
ona, from  1910  to  1917,  was  bom  Dec. 
5,  1880,  in  Snowflake,  Arizona,  a  son 
of  Jesse  N.  Smith  and  Augusta  Outsen. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  25, 
1910,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

SWAPP.  William.  Bishop  of  the 
Luna  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1886  to  1888,  was  bora  Oct.  28, 
1892,  a  son  of  Melvin  Swapp  and  Mar- 
garet A.  Mortensen.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  7,  1886, 
by  Jesse  N.  Smith. 

TENNEY,   Warren   Moroni,  Bishop 

of  the  Alpine  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  190«  to  1921,  was  bom 
Jan.  4,  1861,  in  Payson,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Warren  R.  Tenney  and  Julia  A. 
Phelps.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  4,  1869, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1904-1906,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  22,  1908,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant.  He  died  June  21, 1935. 

THOMPSON,  Mansel  Hardy,  acting 
Bishop  of  the  Luna  Ward,  St.  Johns 
Stake,  Arizona,  in  1895,  was  bom  Aug. 
17,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Ezra  Thompson  and  Anna  D. 
Piatt.  He  was  baptized  in  1868,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  9,  1888,  by 


Wm.  H.  Gibbons,  and  sustained  as 
presiding  Elder  at  Luna  Aug.  15, 1895. 
He  died  April  17.  1933. 

UD.\LL.  Levi  Stewart,  president  of 
the  St.  Johns  Stake,  -\rizona.  from 
1922  to  1930  — ,  was  bom  Jan.  20.  1891, 
in  St.  Johns,  Arizona,  a  son  of  David 
K.  Udall  and  Eliza  Luella  Stewart. 
He  was  baptized  Feb.  11,  1899,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  11,  1920,  by 
his  father,  and  set  apart  April  30, 
1922.  as  president  of  the  Stake  by 
Rudger  Clawson, 

WHITING.  Charles,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Vernon  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1922  to  1930 -f,  was 
bom  May  25,  1881,  in  Brigham  City, 
Ariz.,  the  son  of  Charles  Whiting  and 
Verona  Snow.  He  was  baptized  in 
1889.  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  1,  1922,  by  Rudger  Claw- 


WILKINS,  Orson,  Bishop  of  the 
Nutriosa  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake,  Ariz- 
ona, from  1901  to  1913,  was  bom  Oct. 
19,  1871,  in  Kanab.  Utah,  a  son  of 
James  W.  Wilkins  and  Lucinda  Man- 
gum.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  19,  1879, 
went  to  Arizona  in  1882,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1898- 
1899,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Phriest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  6,  1901,  by  Mathias 
F.  Cowley. 

WILLL\MS.  George  Calvin,  Bishop 
of  the  Luna  Ward,  St.  Johns  Stake, 
Ariz.,  from  1883  to  1885,  was  bom 
Feb.  27,  1836,  near  Chattanooga,  Ten- 
nessee, a  son  of  Geo.  W.  Williams  and 
Elizabeth  Davis.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  16,  1881,  went  to  Nutriosa  in 
1877,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov. 
18,  1883,  by  Brigham  Young,  jun. 


St.  Joseph  Stake 

.\LLRED.   Edsil   .Myron,   Bishop  of 
the  Central  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


599 


Arizona,  from  1909  to  1926,  was  born 
Jan.  6,  1860,  in  Spring  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Joseph  A.  Allred  and  Rhoda 
Palmer.  He  was  baptized  in  1868,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  June  6,  1909,  by 
John  Henry  Smith. 

BIRTCHER,      Benjamin      Franklin, 

Bishop  of  the  Globe  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  20,  1886,  in  Pisgah, 
Preston  Co.,  W.  Va.,  a  son  of  Lockard 
I.  Birtcher  and  Minerva  J.  Knotts.  He 
was  baptized  July  24,  1905,  came  to 
Utah  in  1907,  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Sept.  29,  1912,  by  Heber  C.  Iverson, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1913-1915.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Dec.  19,  1920,  by  An- 
drew Kimball,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  12, 
1929,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

BLACK,  Edward  Webb,  Bishop  of 
the  Emery  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Dec.  19,  1881,  in  Orderville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  M.  Black  and  Louisa 
Ann  Washburn.  He  was  baptized  in 
1890,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  20,  1922,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

BLAKE,  Isaac  Brigham,  Bishop  of 
the  Pima  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1927  to  1930,  was  born 
April  14,  1877,  in  Wanship,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  Blake  and  Mary  Lake. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  3,  1885,  filled 
a  mission  to  England  in  1910-1912, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1912  by 
Andrew  Kimball,  and  a  Bishop  Feb. 
26,   1927,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

BOREN,  Coleman  Briant,  Bishop 
of  the  Matthews  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Ariz.,  from  1898  to  1901,  was 
born  Dec.  29,  1849,  in  Mt.  Pisgah, 
Iowa,  a  son  of  Coleman  Boren  and 
Malinda  Keller.  He  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  Feb.  7,  1898,  by  John  Henry 
Smith. 


BRYCE,  Alma  Nephi,  Bishop  of  the 
Bryce  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Ariz- 
ona, from  1892  to  1902,  was  born  Oct. 
24,  1861,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Ebenezer  Bryce  and  Mary  Ann 
Park.  He  was  chosen  as  Bishop  Oct. 
9,  1892,  and  died  in  El  Paso,  in  De- 
cember, 1915. 

CARTER,  Alof  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Matthews  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1923  to  1929,  was  born 
March  2,  1891,  in  Matthews,  the  son 
of  Edwin  T.  Carter  and  Betsy  Larson. 
He  was  baptized  May  7,  1899,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  27,  1923,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

CLARIDGE,  David  Harmon,  Bishop 
of  the  Bryce  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Ariz.,  from  1902  to  1909,  was  born 
June  30,  1873,  in  Mt.  Carmel,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Samuel  Claridge  and  Re- 
becca Hughes.  He  was  baptized  in 
1881,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  16,  1902,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith. 

CLUFF,  James,  Bishop  of  the  Cen- 
tral Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1889  to  1902,  was  born  Oct.  7, 
1866,  in  Heber  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Moses  M.  Cluff  and  Rebecca  Lang- 
man.  He  was  baptized  June  22,  1877, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  by  John  Henry 
Smith  Dec.  29,  1889.  He  died  about 
1910. 

CLUFF,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the  Cen- 
tral Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1883  to  1885,  was  born  Jan.  11, 
1834,  in  Willoughby,  Geauga  Co.,  Ohio, 
the  son  of  David  Clough  and  Betsy 
Hall.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old  in  Nauvoo,  came  to  Utah  in 
1850,  filled  a  mission  to  Canada  in 
1870-1872,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Brigham  Young,  jun.,  in  1883.  He 
died  June  4,  1914. 

COLVIN,  Lachonius  Moroni,  presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Eden  Ward,  St.  Jos- 


600 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


eph  Stake,  Arizona,  from  1893  to  1898, 
was  born  Aug.  16,  1846,  in  Pottawat- 
tamie Co.,  Iowa,  the  son  of  David  S. 
Colvin  and  Harriet  A.  Delabaugh.  He 
was  appointed  presiding  Elder  pro 
tem.  Sept.  8,  1893,  by  Christopher 
Layton. 

CURTIS,  Moses  Monroe,  Bishop  of 
the  Graham  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1882  to  1883,  was  born 
Oct.  28,  1840,  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  a 
son  of  Moses  Curtis  and  Aurelia  Jack- 
man.  He  was  baptized  in  1848,  came 
to  Utah  in  1850,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young. 
He  died  May  4,  1907. 

ELLSWORTH,  William,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake  pi'esi- 
dency,  Arizona,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Aug.  17,  1872,  in  Leeds, 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  Henry  Ellsworth 
and  Eliza  R.  Snow  McCleave.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  17,  1880,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1916- 
1918,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
12,  1910,  by  E.  S.  Carpenter,  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  in  the  Stake 
presidency  Sept.  9,  1928,  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  jun. 

FULLER,  Thomas  Francis,  Bishop 
of  the  Eden  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1923  to  1929,  was  born 
May  16,  1889,  in  Eden,  a  son  of  Thom- 
as A.  Fuller  and  Annie  M.  Colvin.  He 
was  baptized  March  5,  1898,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  24,  1923,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

GREEN,  Reece  D.,  Bishop  of  the 
Pima  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Ariz- 
ona, from  1920  to  1926,  was  born  Jan. 
10,  1888,  at  Pima,  a  son  of  Jack  Green 
and  Rhoda  Holladay.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  3,  1896,  ordained  an  Elder 
Jan.  12,  1908,  by  Philemon  C.  Merrill, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southei-n 
States  in  1908-1910.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  8,  1920, 
by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 


HANCHETT,  Ray  Monroe,  Bishop 
of  the  Thatcher  East  Ward,  St.  Jos- 
eph Stake,  Ariz.,  from  1924  to  1927, 
was  born  in  December,  1884,  in  Grass 
Valley,  Utah,  a  son  of  Myron  Nathan- 
iel Hanchett  and  Delia  Millicent  Reed. 
He  was  baptzed  July  31,  1895,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb. 
17,  1924,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HANCOCK,  Jesse  Alonzo,  Bishop 
of  the  Eden  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Oct.  1,  1897,  in  Eden,  the  son  of 
Jacob  A.  Hancock  and  Rozella  Tyler. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  1,  1905,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1916-1918,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
March  17,  1929,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

HOLYOAK,  James  Nehemiah,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Emery  Branch,  St. 
Joseph  Stake,  Arizona,  from  1905  to 
1921,  was  born  April  26,  1872,  in  Paro- 
wan,  Utah.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old. 

HUBBARD,  Elisha  Freeman,  Bi.sh- 
op  of  the  Hubbard  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1900  to  1902, 
was  born  March  5,  1838,  in  Ogden, 
Lenawee  Co.,  Michigan,  a  son  of  Mar- 
shall Moore  Hubbard  and  Caroline 
Eliza  Nickerson.  He  was  baptized  in 
1846,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
27,  1900,  by  Heber  J.  Grant.  He  died 
March  28,  1911. 

HUNSAKER,  Lorenzo,  Bishop  of 
the  Globe  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1907  to  1928,  was  born 
March  21,  1859,  in  Brigham  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Abraham  Hunsaker 
and  Margaret  Sweeten.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  nine  years  old,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1879- 
1881,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec. 
1,  1907,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

KEMPTON,  Heber  Curtis,  Bishop 
of  the  Eden  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1921  to  1923,  was  born 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


601 


April  20,  1890,  in  Eden,  a  son  of  Alvin 
B.  Kempton  and  Sarah  K.  Curtis.  He 
was  baptized  June  5,  1898,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Nov.  9,  1921,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

KIMBALL,  Crozier,  Bishop  of  the 
St.  David  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Ariz.,  from  1907  to  1909,  was  born 
Dec.  19,  1879,  in  Lehi,  Arizona,  a  son 
of  David  P.  Kimball  and  Caroline  M. 
Williams.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  15, 
1887,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1900-1902,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  May  31,  1905,  by  Ma- 
thias  F.  Cowley,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  1, 
1907,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

KIMBALL,  David  Patten,  first 
counselor  in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake  pres- 
idency, Arizona,  in  1883,  was  born 
Aug.  23,  1839,  in  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  a 
son  of  Heber  Chase  Kimball  and  Vi- 
late  Murray.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
England  in  1863-1865,  acted  as  pre- 
siding Elder  of  St.  David  in  1881- 
1883,  and  died  Nov.  22,  1883,  in  St. 
David,  Arizona. 

KIMBALL,  Spencer  Woolley,  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake 
presidency,  Arizona,  from  1924  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  March  28,  1895,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Andrew 
Kimball  and  Olive  Woolley.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Central  States  in 
1914-1917,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  Sept. 
8,  1924,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

LAYTON,  Harry  Wilford,  Bishop 
of  the  Central  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1926  to  1930,  was  born 
Oct.  7,  1876,  in  Kaysville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Christopher  Layton  and  Han- 
nah M.  S.  Sims.  He  was  baptized  in 
Eden,  Ariz.,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  6,  1909,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  a  Bishop  Nov.  6,  1926,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 


LAYTON,  Jesse  Monroe,  Bishop  of 
the  Solomonville  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1920  to  1922, 
was  born  Dec.  27,  1884,  in  Eden,  Ariz- 
ona, the  son  of  Christopher  Layton 
and  Hannah  M.  S.  Sims.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1893,  ordained  an  Elder  by 
Andrew  Kimball,  filled  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand  in  1904-1907,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  21,  1921,  by 
Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

LEE,  John  Amasa,  Bishop  of  the 
Lebanon  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1912  to  1923,  was  born 
March  10,  1860,  in  Washington,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  D.  Lee  and  Rachel  A. 
Woolsey.  He  was  baptized  in  1868, 
and  set  apart  as  Bishop  Dec.  31,  1911, 
by  Andrew  Kimball. 

LOFGREN,  Peter  Anders,  Bishop 
of  the  St.  David  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1888  to  1901, 
was  born  Jan.  18,  1847,  at  Orja,  Swe- 
den, a  son  of  Anders  Pehrson  Lof- 
gren  and  Sisa  Bengtson.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  8,  1860,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1862,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  7,  1884,  by  Christopher  Layton, 
and  a  Bishop  Feb.  12,  1888,  also  by 
Christopher  Layton.  He  died  March 
6,  1922. 

MATTHEWS,  Daniel  Alonzo,  Bish- 
op of  the  Matthews  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1918  to  1923, 
was  born  July  18,  1887,  in  Matthews, 
a  son  of  D.  H.  Matthews  and  Clara 
Wall.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  20,  1895, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  24,  1918, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

MATTHEWS,  David  Henry,  Bishop 

of  the  Matthews  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1886  to  1898,  was 
born  Dec.  28,  1851,  in  San  Bernardino, 
Calif.,  a  son  of  Joseph  Matthews  and 
Polly  Matthews.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  came  to 
Utah  in  the  winter  of  1857-1858,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op March  21,  1886, 


602 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


McBRTDE,   James   Andrew,  jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Bryce  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1924  to  1930, 
was  born  Dec.  7,  1867,  in  Santaquin, 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  Andrew  Mc- 
Bride  and  Elizabeth  Clark.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Feb.  14,  1925,  by 
Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

McGRATH,  James  Vernon,  Bishop 
of  the  Franklin  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Sept.  14,  1906,  in  Manassa, 
Colorado,  a  son  of  James  Franklin 
McGrath  and  Laura  E.  Elledge.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  3,  1914,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Netherlands  in  1926- 
1929,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
his  father  in  December,  1929,  and  a 
Bishop  by  Harry  L.  Payne. 

MERRILL,  John  Smith,  Bishop  of 
the  St.  David  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1901  to  1907,  was  born 
March  5,  1853,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Philemon  C.  Merrill  and 
Mary  Jane  Smith.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  and  was  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  in  1901. 

MERRILL,  Morgan  Henry,  second 
counselor  in  the  St.  Joseph  Stake 
presidency,  Arizona,  from  1884  to 
1888,  was  born  Feb.  17,  1850,  in  Big 
Cottonwood,  Utah,  the  son  of  Phile- 
mon Merrill  and  Cyrene  Dustin.  He 
was  baptized  in  1858,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  and  set  apart  in 
1884  to  preside  over  the  St.  David 
Ward  by  Moses  Thatcher.  He  died 
July  31,  1896. 

MERRILL,    Philemon    Christopher, 

jun..  Bishop  of  the  Pima  Ward,  St. 
Joseph  Stake,  Arizona,  from  1902  to 
1918,  was  born  Nov.  16,  1876,  in  Nou- 
nan  Valley,  Idaho,  the  son  of  Phile- 
mon C.  Merrill  and  Lucinda  P.  Brown. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  sustained  as  Bishop  April  28, 
1902,  and  set  apart  by  Andrew  Kim- 
ball. 


NATIONS,  Thomas  Jefferson,  Bish- 
op of  the  Franklin  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1903  to  1913, 
was  born  Feb.  17,  1849,  in  Georgia, 
the  son  of  Israel  Nations  and  Jane 
Cannally.  He  was  baptized  April  6, 
1882,  sustained  as  Bishop  Nov.  8, 
1903,  and  set  apart  by  Andrew  Kim- 
ball. 

NAYLOR,  Thomas  Clarence,  Bishop 

of  the  Layton  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1928  to  1930 -[-,  was 
born  April  8,  1895,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  G.  Naylor  and 
Grace  Major.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
13,  1903,  ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  19, 
1922,  by  Jos.  W.  McMurrin,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Central  States  in 
1923-1925.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  23,  1926,  by  Spencer  Kim- 
ball, and  was  sustained  as  Bishop  Nov. 
18,  1928. 

PALMER,  Isaac  James,  Bishop  of 
the  Eden  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1914  to  1918,  was  born 
Oct.  3,  1873,  in  Bloomington,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  Isaac  Palmer  and  Alice  E. 
Holmes.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  14,  1914,  by 
Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

PAYNE,  Junius  Edward,  Bishop  of 
the  Vii'den  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1926  to  1930-1-,  was 
born  Oct.  3,  1887,  in  Aurora,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Harry  M.  Payne  and  Helen 
Amelia  Buchanan.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  3,  1897,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  26,  1916,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith, 
and  a  Bishop  May  23,  1926,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 

PECK,  George  A..  Bishop  of  the 
Bryce  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Ariz- 
ona, from  1909  to  1924,  was  born  Jan. 
16,  1884,  in  Nutriosa,  Arizona,  a  son 
of  George  O.  Peck  and  Barbara  E. 
Bryce.  He  was  baptized  April  6,  1892, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  1,  1907, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith,  and  a  Bishop 
June  6,  1909,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


603 


PETERSON,  James  Ammon,  Bish- 
op of  the  Kimball  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Aug.  20,  1894,  in  Graham, 
Arizona,  a  son  of  Peter  C.  Peterson 
and  Mary  Anderson.  He  was  bap- 
tized Feb.  1,  1903,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  26,  1928, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

PORTER,  Alva  Sylvanus,  Bishop  of 
the  Eden  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1898  to  1900,  was  born 
May  26,  1860,  in  Centerville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Lyman  W.  Porter  and  Electa 
Mariah  Kilburn.  He  was  baptized  in 
May,  1868,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Feb.  7,  1898,  by  John  Hen- 
ry Smith.  He  acted  as  Bishop  of 
Central  Ward  from  1902  to   1909. 

PORTER,  James  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Thatcher  East  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1927  to  1929,  was 
born  June  21,  1875,  in  Scipio,  Millard 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  Henry  Por- 
ter and  Emma  U.  Bennett.  He  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1909-1911  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  26,  1927,  by 
Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

REED,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the  Gra- 
ham Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1921  to  1927,  was  born  Nov.  30, 
1878,  in  Lexington,  Tenn.,  a  son  of 
John  T.  Reed  and  Prescilla  Adair.  He 
was  baptized  in  May,  1887,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
20,  1922,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

ROMNEY,  Eugene,  Bishop  of  the 
Franklin  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1922  to  1929,  was  born 
Sept.  16,  1883,  in  St.  Johns,  Arizona, 
a  son  of  Miles  P.  Romney  and  Han- 
nah Hill.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  16, 
1891,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  20, 
1922,  by   Geo.   F.   Richards. 


Stake,  Arizona,  from  1919  to  1922, 
was  born  June  5,  1892,  in  Shumway, 
Arizona,  a  son  of  James  J.  Shumway 
and  Annettie  Hatch.  He  was  baptized 
June  5,  1900,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  21,  1919,  by 
David  0.  McKay. 

SKOUSEN,  Orson  Pratt,  Bishop  of 
the  Thatcher  West  Ward,  St.  Joseph 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1922  to  1927, 
was  born  Sept.  19, 1877,  at  St.  Joseph, 
Arizona,  a  son  of  James  N.  Skousen 
and  Anna  Christina  Jensen.  He  was 
baptized  in  1885,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  9,  1919,  by  Andrew  Kim- 
ball, and  a  Bishop  Aug.  20,  1922,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

SMITH,  Hyrum  Leroy,  Bishop  of 
the  Matthews  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  June  22,  1884,  in  Pleasanton,  New 
Mexico,  a  son  of  Charles  Pears  Smith 
and  Mary  Wilkinson.  He  was  baptiz- 
ed July  6,  1895,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  17,  1929,  by 
Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

SMITH,  James  Martin,  Bishop  of 
the  Central  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Ariz.,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  2,  1892, 
in  Tuba,  Arizona,  a  son  of  Lot  Smith 
and  Diantha  Mortensen.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  15,  1901,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  30,  1926,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard, and  sustained  as  Bishop  Sept. 
21,  1930. 

SMITH,  Nephi  Lot,  Bishop  of  the 
Miami  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Ariz., 
from  1926  to  1930,  was  born  May  15, 
1889,  in  Tuba,  Arizona,  a  son  of  Lot 
Smith  and  Diantha  Mortensen.  He 
was  baptized  in  May,  1897,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in  1910- 
1913,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  20,  1926,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 


SHUMWAY,  Ernest  Hill,  Bishop  of  TATE,  Alma  Vining,  Bishop  of  the 

the  Thatcher  West  Ward,  St.  Joseph      Thatcher     West     Ward,     St.     Joseph 


604 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Stake,  Arizona,  from  1927  to  1929,  was 
born  Sept.  14,  1895,  in  Spanish  Fork, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Martin  Van  Buren  Tate 
and  Margaret  Vining.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  11,  1904,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.*  30,  1927,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

TAYLOR,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Pima 
Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona,  from 
1885  to  1901,  was  born  Oct.  25,  1850, 
in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  a  son  of  Allen 
Taylor  and  Hannah  Egbert.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Dec.  16,  1883,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  3, 
1885,  by  Erastus  Snow.  He  died  May 
29,  1923. 

TYLER,  William  Oscar,  Bishop  of 
the  Ashurst  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  21,  1893,  in  Central,  Ari- 
zona, a  son  of  Oscar  Taylor  and  Mary 
Ann  Virginia  Juan.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  21,  1901,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  21,  1922,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

UDALL,  Jesse  Addison,  Bishop  of 
the  Thatcher  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1929  to  1930 -f,  was 
born  June  24,  1893,  in  Eagar,  Arizona, 
a  son  of  David  K.  Udall  and  Ida  F. 
Hunt.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  3,  1901, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman  in  1920,  and  a  Bishop  March 
17,  1929,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

WEECH,  David  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Pima  Ward,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1901  to  1902,  was  born  Sept.  27, 
1875,  in  Goshen,  Utah,  a  son  of  Hyrum 
Weech  and  Sarah  Dall.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  7,  1884,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  18,  1901, 
by  Mathias  F.  Cowley. 

WELKER,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Lay- 
ton  Wai'd,  St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1884  to  1898,  was  born  March  16, 


1826,  in  Maddison  Township,  Jackson 
Co.,  Ohio,  a  son  of  James  Welker  and 
Elizabeth  Stoker.  He  came  to  the  Val- 
ley in  1852,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  26,  1877,  by  John  Taylor, 
and  a  Bishop  Nov.  4,  1884,  by  Brig- 
ham  Young,  jun.    He  died  June  1,  1913, 

WILKINS,  Joseph  David,  Bishop  of 
the  Franklin  Wax'd,  St.  Joseph  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1913  to  1922,  was  born 
April  25,  1877,  in  Coffee  County,  Ala- 
bama, the  son  of  John  T.  Wilkins  and 
Virginia  Wilkerson.  He  was  baptized 
Feb.  8,  1888,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  in  1910-1912,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  15,  1913,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 


Salt  Lake  Stake 

BACK  MAN,  LeGrand  Pollard,  Bish- 
op of  the  34th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1927,  was  born  Dec. 
18,  1893,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Gustave  H.  Backman  and  Grace  Pol- 
lard. He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  South  Africa  in 
1915-1917,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  22,  1920,  by 
Anthon  H.  Lund. 

DAVIS,  Albert  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Center  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1916  to  1922,  was  born  Oct.  14, 
1866,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Albert  W.  Davis  and  Melissa  J.  Lamb- 
son.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  14,  1874, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  Hawaii  in  1891-1894,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  25,  1906, 
by  Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Sept.  14,  1916,  by  Anthon  H. 
Lund. 

GLAD,     Alfred     Peter     Andersen, 

Bishop  of  the  28th  Ward,  Salt  Lake 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1922  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  2,  1890,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Niels  Peter  Andersen 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


605 


and  Alphine  C.  Alfsen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  3,  1898,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  16,  1922,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

HARTER,  John  Albert,  Bishop  of 
the  23rd  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake,  from 
1921  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  4,  1885, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
Robert  Harter  and  Mary  Ellen  Max- 
well. He  was  baptized  Dec.  9,  1897, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1907-1909, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Oct.  18,  1921,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

HAZEN,  Samuel  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Center  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake,  Utah, 
in  1916,  was  born  Jan.  1,  1867,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Robert 
Hazen  and  Mary  A.  Bainbridge.  He 
was  baptized  March  1,  1881,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  in 
Indian  Territory  in  1906-1908,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
April  2, 1916,  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 

HOLLINGWORTH,  Benjamin  Han- 
son, Bishop  of  the  Center  Ward,  Salt 
Lake  Stake,  from  1922  to  1925,  was 
born  Oct.  8,  1896,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Benjamin  Hatton  Hol- 
lingworth  and  Emma  Hanson.  He  was 
baptized  Dec.  2,  1904,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1916-1918,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  10,  1922,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

JORGENSEN,  George  Daniel,  Bish- 
op of  the  22nd  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  13, 
1887,  in  Arendal,  Norway,  a  son  of 
Thorbjorn  Jorgensen  and  Anne  Peder- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  13,  1901, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Jan.  24,  1930,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

KASTELER,  Fred,  Bishop  of  the 
15th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1927  to   1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov. 


24,  1894,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Christian  Kasteler  and  Marie 
Hostetter.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1, 
1903,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1916-1918,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  15,  1920,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  2,  1927, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

LAKE,  Joseph  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
16th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1922  to  1932,  was  born  Oct.  7, 
1884,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Silas  T.  Lake  and  Annie  Elizabeth 
Anderson.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  5, 
1898,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1903-1905,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  22,  1910,  by  Nephi  L.  Morris,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  1,  1922,  by 
George  F.  Richards.  He  died  Nov.  7, 
1932,  at  Salt  Lake  City. 

LONGDEN,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
19th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930,  was  born  Nov.  4, 
1898,  in  Oldham,  England,  a  son  of 
Thomas  J.  Longden  and  Lizzette  Tay- 
lor. He  was  baptized  in  1906,  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States  in  1921-1924,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  27,  1925,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

NALDER,  Daniel  Hyrum,  Bishop  of 
the  24th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1928  to  1930,  was  born  Sept.  11, 
1878,  in  Layton,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  N.  Nalder  and  Emma 
Evans.  He  was  baptized  July  22,  1888, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  April  17,  1921, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Dec.  9,  1928,  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

NEWMAN,  Stephen  Burton,  Bishop 
of  the  34th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 -f-,  was  born 
Dec.  11,  1885,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Stephen  Jackson  Newman  and 
Hannah  Sel'ley.    He  was  baptized  Jan. 


606 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


29,  1894,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  Turkey  in  1905-1909, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  March  27,  1927,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

NIELSEN,  Peter  Aagaard,  Bishop 
of  the  15th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1927,  was  born  Dec. 
23,  1884,  in  Kvottrup,  Faarup  parish, 
Aarhus  amt,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Poul 
C.  Nielsen  and  Sine  Aagaard.  He  was 
baptized  June  15,  1903,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1893,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  17,  1920,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

OLSON,  Oscar  Mark,  Bishop  of  the 
24th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake,  Utah, 
since  1930,  was  born  May  15,  1886,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
Fred  Olson  and  Anna  Olson.  He  was 
baptized  June  4,  1894,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Swe- 
den in  1911-1914,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  28,  1930, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

OPENSHAW,  Frank  Myron,  Bishop 
of  the  22nd  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930,  was  born 
April  5,  1897,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Jonathan  E.  Openshaw  and 
Bessie  Lees.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  11,  1926,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

STUTZNEGGER,  Conrad,  Bishop  of 
the  Center  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  26,  1880,  in  Manti,  Sanpete  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Stutznegger  and 
Barbara  Catherine  Ramsauer.  He  was 
baptized  Feb.  5,  1890,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Switzer- 
land and  Germany  in  1902-1904,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  15,  1920, 
by  Charles  W.  Penrose,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  20,  1925,  by  Richard  R. 
layman. 


San  Francisco  Stake 

CARR,  Charles  Clyde,  Bishop  of  the 
Oakland  Ward,  San  Francisco  Stake, 
Calif.,  from  1927  to  1930,  was  born 
July  9,  1886,  at  Molino,  Florida,  the 
son  of  Wm.  G.  Carr  and  Frances  J. 
Wallace.  He  was  baptized  April  4, 
1897,  came  to  the  San  Luis  Stake  in 
1902,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
24,  1918,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  a 
Bishop  July  10,  1927,  by  Geo.  Albert 
Smith. 

CHENEY,  Leo  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Elmhurst  Ward,  San  Francisco  Stake, 
Calif.,  from  1927  to  1930,  was  born 
June  5,  1896,  in  Fruitland,  New  Mex- 
ico, the  son  of  Franklin  Cheney  and 
Edith  Hilton.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  10,  1927,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

DEWSNUP,    Claude    Mace,    Bishop 

of  the  Richmond  Ward,  San  Francisco 
Stake,  Calif.,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  16,  1886,  in  Deseret, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Hyrum  Dewsnup  and 
Emily  Mace.  He  was  baptized  May 
16,  1894,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  10,  1927,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

DUNYON,  Phares  Wells,  Bishop  of 
the  Berkeley  Ward,  San  Francisco 
Stake,  Calif.,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  21,  1874,  in  Tooele  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Isaac  Newton  Dun- 
yon  and  Evelyn  Wells.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  6,  1895,  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Brigham  Young,  jun.,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southwestern  States  Mis- 
sion in  1896-1898,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  10,  1927,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son, and  a  Bishop  May  20,  1928,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

JACOBS,  Eugene  Brown,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakland  Ward,  San  Francisco 
Stake,  Calif.,  in  1930,  was  born  May  4, 
1899,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son 
of  Ernest  Eugene  Jacobs  and  Annie 
Eliza  Brown.  He  was  baptized  Jan. 
31,  1908,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


607 


ern  States  in  1919-1921,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb. 
20,  1930,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

KEST,  John  James  (Johannes  Ja- 
cobus), Bishop  of  the  Martinez  Ward, 
San  Francisco  Stake,  California,  from 
1927  to  1930,  was  born  Feb.  26,  1896, 
at  Vlissingen  (Flushing),  Netherlands, 
a  son  of  Johannes  Robertus  Kest  and 
Joziena  Cornelia  Lute.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  10,  1908,  at  Rotterdam,  by 
Jan  Eggen,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1911, 
and  later  moved  to  California.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op July  10,  1927,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

KJAR,  Karl,  Bishop  of  the  Sunset 
Ward,  San  Francisco  Stake,  Calif., 
from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
17,  1887,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  J.  Kjar  and  Ida  Johan- 
son.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  10,  1927,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

MERRILL,  Fred,  Bishop  of  the  Mis- 
sion Ward,  San  Francisco  Stake, 
Calif.,  from  1927  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
April  11,  1874,  at  Addelthorp,  Lincoln- 
shire, England,  the  son  of  John  Foster 
Merrill  and  Hannah  Whiley.  He  was 
baptized  March  7,  1890,  came  to  Utah 
in  1892,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Jan. 
31,  1904,  by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  England  in  1905-1907.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op July  10,  1927,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

NEWMAN,  Jay  Clarence,  Bishop  of 
the  San  Francisco  Ward,  San  Fran- 
cisco Stake,  Calif.,  in  1927,  was  born 
Dec.  1,  1899,  in  Holladay,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Thomas  S.  Newman  and  Caro- 
line Marie  Wayman.  He  was  baptized 
Jan.  4,  1908,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  10,  1927,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

PEARSON,  Rulon  Vance,  Bishop  of 
the  Balboa  Ward,  San  Francisco 
Stake,  Calif.,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  July  12,  1886,  in  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Benjamin  W.  Pear- 


son and  Sarah  Ellis  Hawley.  He  was 
baptized  April  8,  1895,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  17,  1928,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney,  and  a  Bishop  May  19, 
1929,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 

ROBINSON,  Thomas  Henry,  Bish- 
op of  the  Dimond  Ward,  San  Francisco 
Stake,  Calif.,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  18,  1887,  in  Mona,  Juab  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Eli  Robinson  and  Julia 
Ellertsen.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  20,  1927,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 


San  Juan  Stake 


HAMMOND,  Clyde  Asbury,  Bishop 
of  the  Moab  Ward,  San  Juan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1918  to  1921,  was  born 
March  25,  1885,  in  Huntsville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Fletcher  B.  Hammond  and 
Olive  C.  Bronson.  He  was  baptized 
June  1,  1893,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Netherlands  in  1904-1906,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Dec.  2,  1917,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney.  He  died  March  23,  1921, 
while  serving  in  the  Fourteenth  legis- 
lature of  Utah  as  a  member  of  the 
House  of  Representatives  from  Grand 
County. 

HAMMOND,     Walter     Dilworth, 

Bishop  of  the  La  Sal  Ward  from  1917 
to  1921,  and  Bishop  of  the  Moab  Ward, 
San  Juan  Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  April  29,  1887,  in 
Bluff,  Utah,  a  son  of  Fletcher  B.  Ham- 
mond and  Olive  C.  Bronson.  He  was 
baptized  May  3,  1895,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1906-1909, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  3, 
1910,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a  Bish- 
op Nov.  17,  1917,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards. 

HARRIS,  Joseph  Bond,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  San  Juan  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  March  22,  1879,  in  Henefer, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Micah  F.  Harris  and 
Mary   Jane   Bond.      He   was   ordained 


608 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


a  High  Priest  May  18,  1919,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard,  who  also  ordained  him  a 
Bishop  Nov.  25,  1923.  He  presided 
as  Bishop  over  the  Grayson  Ward, 
San  Juan  Stake,  in  1923-1925,  and  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  Dec.  2, 
1928,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

JAMESON,  Alexander,  Bishop  of 
the  La  Sal  Ward,  San  Juan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1922,  was  born 
May  18,  1859,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Alexander  Jameson  and  Priene  B. 
Ewell.  He  was  baptized  in  1867,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  18,  1892,  by 
William  Howard,  and  a  Bishop  June 
19,  1921,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

JARVIS,  George  Josiah,  Bishop  of 
the  Monticello  Ward,  San  Juan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1920,  was  born 
Oct.  13,  1881,  in  Snowflake,  Arizona, 
a  son  of  Samuel  Walter  Jarvis  and 
Frances  G.  De  Friez.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  13,  1889,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southwestern  States  in  1901-1903,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op June  3,  1917,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

JOHNSON,  David  Almon,  Bishop 
of  the  Moab  Ward,  San  Juan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1897  to  1903,  was  born 
April  8,  1861,  in  Santaquin,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Geo.  W.  Johnson  and  Eveline 
Burdick.  He  was  baptized  May  2, 
1886,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  April  25,  1897,  by  John  Henry 
Smith. 

JONES,  Frederick  Isaac,  Bishop  of 
the  Monticello  Ward,  San  Juan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1890  to  1911,  was  born 
Feb.  6,  1851,  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  a  son 
of  John  P.  Jones  and  Margaret  Lee. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  25,  1890, 
by  John  Henry  Smith.  He  died  Oct. 
18,  1925. 

JONES,  Leonard  Kuitien,  second 
counselor  in  the  San  Juan  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  6,  1889,  in  Bluff,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Kumen  Jones  and  Mary  Niel- 
son.     He  was  baptized  Nov.  6,  1897, 


ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  17,  1918, 
by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  a  Bishop 
April  6,  1926,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman, 
and  set  apart  Dec.  2,  1928,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman  as  second  counselor  in  the 
Stake  presidency.  He  acted  as  Bishop 
of  the  Blanding  Ward  from  1925  to 
1928.  Bro.  Jones  died  July  25,  1931, 
in  Blanding,  Utah. 

LYMAN,  Albert  Rob  is  on,  first 
counselor  in  the  San  Juan  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1912  to  1928,  was 
born  Jan.  10,  1880,  in  Fillmore,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Platte  D.  Lyman  and  Adelia 
Robison.  He  was  baptized  June  16, 
1888,  ordained  an  Elder  April  2,  1899, 
filled  a  mission  to  England  in  1899- 
1900,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
10,  1908,  by  Walter  C.  Lyman,  and  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  May  21,  1912, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

PERKINS,  Daniel,  Bishop  of  the 
Bluff  Ward,  San  Juan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1923  to  1928,  was  born  Jan.  9, 
1887,  in  Bluff,  the  son  of  Hyrum  Per- 
kins and  Rachel  Cory.  He  was  bap- 
tized Jan.  13,  1895,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Feb.  27,  1911,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1911-1914,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  27,  1923,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

PETERSON,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Moab  Ward,  San  Juan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1915  to  1918,  was  born  Nov.  15, 
1868,  in  Saxtorp,  Sweden,  a  son  of 
Bengt  Pehrson.  He  was  baptized,  after 
coming  to  Utah  in  1869,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1897- 
1899,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  by  Heber  J.  Grant  May  30, 
1915. 

PETERSON,  Mens,  Bishop  of  the 
Moab  Ward,  San  Juan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1893  to  1896,  was  born  April  30, 
1861,  near  Stockholm,  Sweden.  He 
came  to  Utah  when  seven  years  old, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  13, 
1893,  by  Brigham  Young,  jun. 

REDD,  Amasa  Jay,  Bishop  of  the 
Monticello    Ward,    San    Juan    Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


609 


Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  10,  1895,  at  Bluff,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Lemuel  H.  Redd  and  Lucy  Zina  Ly- 
man. He  was  baptized  April  10,  1903, 
ordained  a  Seventy  May  17,  1919,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard,  filled  two  missions 
to  California  in  1919-1923  and  in  1928- 
1930,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Dec.  2,  1928,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

STEWART,     Randolph     Hockaday, 

Bishop  of  the  Moab  Ward,  San  Juan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1881  to  1893,  was 
born  July  20,  1834,  in  Cumberland 
County,  North  Carolina,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam Stewart  and  Delpha  Jones.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
came  to  Utah  in  1847,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  in- 1881  by  John  Tay- 
lor.    He  died  Dec.  6,  1909. 

WOOD,  Joseph  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Monticello  Ward,  San  Juan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1917,  was  born 
March  8,  1875,  in  Cedar  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Samuel  and  Josephine  C. 
Wood.  He  was  ordained  to  the  Priest- 
hood, filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1900-1902,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  1910,  and  sustained  as 
Bishop  May  21,  1912. 


San  Luis  Stake 


BRADY,  Columbus  Franklin,  Bish- 
op of  the  Manassa  Ward,  San  Luis 
Stake,  Colorado,  from  1928  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Aug.  16,  1893,  in  Manassa, 
Colorado,  the  son  of  Christopher  C. 
Brady  and  Nancy  Raynor.  He  was 
baptized  June  1,  1902,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  19,  1926,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  22,  1928, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

BRADY,  John  Jefferson,  second 
counselor  in  the  San  Luis  Stake  presi- 
dency, Colo.,  from  1924  to  1930  4-,  was 
born  March  6,  1887,  in  Jasper  County, 
Miss.,  a  son  of  Christopher  C.  Brady 

Vol.  IV,  No.  39 


and  Nancy  Raynor.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  1,  1896,  ordained  an  Elder  April 
24,  1910,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1911-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor by  Geo.  F.  Richards  Dec.  6,  1924. 

CHRISTENSEN,  Erastus  Snow, 

president  of  the  San  Luis  Stake,  Colo., 
from  1908  to  1914,  was  born  Feb.  22, 
18944,  in  Fountain  Green,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Martin  Christensen  and  Mary  J. 
Christensen.  He  was  baptized  April 
6,  1882,  and  set  apart  as  president  of 
the  Stake  Jan.  19,  1908,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards. 

COOMBS,  Ephraim,  Bishop  of  the 
Richfield  Ward,  San  Luis  Stake,  Colo., 
from  1891  to  1905,  was  born  Dec.  21, 
1849,  at  Stafford,  England,  a  son  of 
George  Coombs  and  Eliza  Astbury.  He 
was  baptized  May  10,  1858,  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1864,  was  set  apart  as 
president  of  the  Richfield  Branch 
April  22,  1888,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  13,  1891,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  died  May  29, 
1920. 

CROWTHER,  Thomas  A.,  second 
counselor  in  the  San  Luis  Stake  presi- 
dency, Colo.,  from  1893  to  1905,  and 
first  counselor  from  1905  to  1908,  was 
born  March  29,  1858,  in  Cedar  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Crowther 
and  Jane  Jewkes.  He  was  baptized 
in  1866,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan. 
29,  1893,  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

DALTON,  Edward,  first  counselor 
of  the  San  Luis  Stake  px-esidency, 
Colo.,  from  1886  to  1892,  was  born 
March  23,  1827,  in  Bradford,  Penn., 
the  son  of  John  Dalton  and  Rebecca 
Cronmer.  He  was  baptized  June  4, 
1843.  He  was  appointed  first  coun- 
selor March  7,  1886,  and  was  set  apart 
to  that  position  June  27,  1886,  by  John 
Henry  Smith.     He  died  April  6,  1896. 

Sept.  26,  1936 


610 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


HELM,  Levi  P.,  president  of  the 
San  Luis  Stake  of  Zion,  Colorado, 
from  1905  to  1908,  was  born  Oct.  22, 
1851,  in  Sandusky  Co.,  Ohio,  the  son 
of  Abraham  Heh-n  and  Mary  Richards. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  13,  1861,  and 
set  apart  as  president  of  the  stake 
July  16,  1905,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
He  died  April  3,  1934. 

JACKSON,  Samuel,  jun,  second 
counselor  in  the  San  Luis  Stake  presi- 
dency, Colo.,  from  1908  to  1919  and 
first  counselor  from  1919  to  1924,  was 
born  Sept.  15,  1869,  in  Nephi,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Samuel  Jackson  and  Han- 
nah M.  Jaques.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
5,  1877,  oi-dained  a  High  Priest  July 
26,  1908,  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor   by    John    Henry    Smith. 

JACKSON,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Manassa  1st  Ward,  San  Luis  Stake, 
Colo.,  from  1925  to  1928,  was  born 
Aug.  21,  1871,  in  Nephi,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Samuel  Jackson  and  Hannah  M. 
Jaques.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1879, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1889-1890,  and  a  mission  to  Eng- 
land in  1909-1911.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Nov.  25,  1916,  by  Hyrum 
S.  Harris,  and  a  Bishop  June  14,  1925, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

JENSEN,  Christian  Peter,  Bishop 
of  the  Manassa  Ward,  San  Luis  Stake, 
Colo.,  from  1922  to  1925,  was  born 
Feb.  23,  1884,  in  Moroni,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Christen  Jensen  and  Carrie 
Peterson.  He  was  baptized  July  7, 
1892,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1906-1908,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  15,  1914,  by  Geo.  Al- 
bert Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Dec.  9,  1922,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

MORTENSEN,   Ammon    Ernst, 

Bishop  of  the  Manassa  Ward,  San  Luis 
Stake,  Colo.,  from  1917  to  1920,  was 
born  Oct.  18,  1877,  in  Parowan,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Anders  Jorgen  Mortensen 
and  Christine  Andersen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Nov.  1,  1885,  ordained  a  Seventy 


Aug.  5,  1906,  by  Joseph  W.  McMurrin, 
and  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1906-1909.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  16,  1914,  by  Eras- 
tus  S.  Christensen,  and  a  Bishop  May 
6,  1917,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

REED,  John  Beaverly,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  San  Luis  Stake  presidency, 
Colo.,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  25,  1875,  in  Lexington,  Tenn.,  a 
son  of  John  L.  Reed  and  Prescilla 
Adair.  He  came  to  Colorado  in  1880, 
was  baptized  Aug.  13,  1883,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Nov.  15,  1914,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop  Dec.  10, 
1922.  He  presided  over  the  Sanford 
Ward  as  Bishop  from  1922  to  1924. 
On  Dec.  6,  1924,  he  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  in  the  stake  presidency  and 
was  set  apart  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

REES,  Thomas  D.,  jun.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  San  Luis  Stake  presidency, 
Colo.,  in  1908,  was  born  Sept.  11,  1877, 
in  Wales,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  D. 
Rees  and  Elizabeth  Rees.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  1,  1885,  ordained  a  High 
Priest,  and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor Jan.  19,  1908,  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith. 

SHAWCROFT,  John  William,  Bish- 
op of  the  Richfield  Ward,  San  Luis 
Stake,  Colo.,  from  1905  to  1908,  was 
born  Dec.  13,  1874,  in  Fountain  Green, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Shawcroft  and 
Anna  Marie  Jensen.  He  was  baptized 
June  4,  1883,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1895-1897,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
July  16,  1905,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

SMITH,  Albert  Ricks,  president  of 
the  San  Luis  Stake  of  Zion,  Colo.,  from 
1892  to  1905,  was  born  April  1,  1862, 
in  Paragonah,  Utah,  the  son  of  Silas 
S.  Smith  and  Sarah  Ann  Ricks.  He 
was  set  apart  as  president  of  the  San 
Luis  Stake  Feb.  17,  1892,  by  Lorenzo 
Snow. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


611 


THOMAS,  Joseph  Francis,  second 
counselor  in  the  San  Luis  Stake  presi- 
dency, Colorado,  from  1890  to  1893, 
was  born  April  4,  1858,  in  Burks  Gar- 
den, Tazwell  Co.,  Virginia,  the  son  of 
Abijah  M.  Thomas  and  Malinda  Dal- 
ton.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  14,  1876, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  18,  1890, 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  in 
the  San  Luis  Stake  presidency  by  Geo. 
Q.  Cannon, 

VALENTINE,  Henry  Wilson,  Bish- 
op of  the  Richfield  Ward,  San  Luis 
Stake,  Colo.,  from  1908  to  1912,  and 
Bishop  of  the  Sanford  Ward  from 
1924  to  1930,  was  born  May  27,  1872, 
in  Jones  Co.,  Miss.,  the  son  of  James 
M.  Valentine  and  Eliza  J.  Coats.  He 
was  baptized  June  1,  1884,  ordained  a 
Seventy  April  11,  1898,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1898-1900.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  16,  1905, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop 
Oct.  24,  1908,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

WEIMER,  Silas  Sylvester,  Bishop 
of  the  Manassa  2nd  Ward,  San  Luis 
Stake,  Colo.,  from  1920  to  1928,  was 
born  Nov.  12,  1873,  in  Garrett  Co., 
Maryland,  the  son  of  Simon  Weimer 
and  Mary  E.  Keefer.  He  was  baptized 
June  6;  1887,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  30,  1920,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 


Sevier  Stake 


ANDERSON,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Richfield  3rd  Ward,  Sevier  Stake,  Se- 
vier Co.,  Utah,  from  1915  to  1919,  was 
born  Aug.  3,  1883,  in  Elsinore,  Sevier 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jens  Christian  An- 
dersen and  Johanne  Slyter.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  31,  1892,  filled  a  mission 
to  Japan  in  1905-1907,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept. 
19,  1915,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

ANDERSEN,  Parley,  Bishop  of  the 
Kooshai-em  Ward,  Sevier  Stake,  Se- 
vier   Co.,   Utah,    from    1904    to    1907, 


was  born  July  27,  1866,  in  Christiania, 
Norway,  the  son  of  Andreas  Andersen 
and  Kirsten  Torgersen.  He  was  bap- 
tized about  1875,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  13,  1904,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

BAGLEY,  Edward  Carroll,  Bishop 
of  the  Koosharem  Ward,  Sevier  Stake, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1930 -f, 
was  born  Feb.  28,  1873,  in  Payson, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Edward 
Alma  Bagley  and  Mary  McClellan.  He 
was  baptized  May  5,  1881,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  13,  1904,  by  Wm. 
H.  Seegmiller,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  26,  1920,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

BEAN,  George  Washington,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  Se- 
vier Stake,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1888  to  1894,  was  born  April  1,  1831, 
in  Centre  Township,  Adams  Co.,  Illi- 
nois, the  son  of  James  Bean  and  Eliza- 
beth Lewis.  He  was  baptized  July  12, 
1841,  ordained  a  Seventy  in  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  in  November,  1845,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Lamanites  in  New 
Mexico  in  1855-1856,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  in  1877,  and  sustained  as 
first  counselor  in  the  Sevier  Stake 
presidency  May  27,  1888.  He  was  set 
apart  to  that  position  by  John  W.  Tay- 
lor. 

HILL,  Leonard  Allison,  Bishop  of 
the  Burrville  Ward,  Sevier  Stake,  Se- 
vier Co.,  Utah,  from  1902  to  1904,  was 
born  April  3,  1868,  in  Payson,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Allison  H.  Hill 
and  Susannah  Chase.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  7,  1876,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  29,  1900,  by  William  H. 
Seegmiller,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  in 
1902. 

LEWIS,  T  a  r  1  t  o  n,  Bishop  of  the 
Richfield  2nd  Ward,  Sevier  Stake,  Se- 
vier Co.,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1878,  was 
born  May  18,  1805,  in  Pendleton  dis- 
trict, South  Carolina,  the  son  of  Ne- 
riah  Lewis  and  Mary  Moss.  He  was 
baptized  July  25,  1836,  ordained  a 
High   Priest   in   1839,   by  Joseph   and 


612 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Hyrum  Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
of  the  4th  Ward  in  Nauvoo  in  1839, 
also  by  Joseph  and  Hyrum  Smith.  He 
was  set  apai-t  to  preside  over  the  Rich- 
field 2nd  Ward  July  16,  1877,  by  Or- 
son Hyde  and  Erastus  Snow.  He  died 
Nov.  22,  1890. 

OGDEN,  Frank  Marsh,  Bishop  of 
the  Richfield  1st  Ward,  Sevier  Stake, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1930, 
was  born  Sept.  18,  1878,  in  Richfield, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Thomas  Ogden  and 
Ann  Marsh.  He  was  baptized  in  1886, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1902-1904,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  1,  1917,  by  Robert  D. 
Young,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept. 
25,   1921,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

POULSEN,  Niels  Christian,  Bishop 
of  the  Richfield  1st  Ward,  Sevier 
Stake,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  from  1917  to 
1921,  was  born  April  14,  1875,  at  Rich- 
field, Utah,  the  son  of  Niels  Poulsen 
and  Caroline  Jacobsen.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  6,  1883,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  24,  1912,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun.,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1915-1917,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  March  18,  1917,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

PKATT,  Helaman,  acting  Bishop  of 
the  Glenwood  Ward  in  1872,  and  Bish- 
op of  the  Prattville  Ward,  Sevier 
Stake,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  from  1873  to 
1875,  was  born  May  31,  1846,  at  Mt. 
Pisgah,  Pottawattamie  Co.,  Iowa,  the 
son  of  Parley  Parker  Pratt  and  Mary 
Wood.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  ordained  an  Elder 
Jan.  23,  1864,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Muddy  in  1868-1871,  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Aug.  21,  1875,  by  Orson 
Pratt,  filled  a  mission  to  Mexico  in 
1875-1876,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  24,  1872,  by  Joseph  A.  Young.  He 
took  charge  as  Bishop  in  1873.  Elder 
Pratt  died  Nov.  26,  1909. 

SORENSEN,  James  Elmer,  Bishop 
of  the  Glenwood  Ward,  Sevier  Stake, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  in  1930 -h,  was  born 


Nov.  8,  1892,  at  Glenwood,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Jens  Sorensen  and  Ellen  Peter- 
sen. He  was  baptized  July  8,  1900, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op June  22,  1930,  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

TEEPLES,  Henry  Alanson,  Bishop 
of  the  Burrville  Ward,  Sevier  Stake, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  from  1891  to  1900, 
was  born  Nov.  8,  1842,  in  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  the  son  of  George  B.  Teeples 
and  Huldah  Colby.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Feb.  22,  1891,  by  Wil- 
liam H.  Seegmiller,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Feb.  22,  1892. 

WARNER,  William  LeRoy,  Bishop 
of  the  Richfield  2nd  Ward,  Sevier 
Stake,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930 -h,  was  born  Oct.  12,  1890,  in  Og- 
den, Utah,  the  son  of  Heber  G.  War- 
ner and  Jane  E.  Sprunt.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1898,  ordained  an  Elder  in 
1910,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Hawaiian 
Islands  in  1910-1912,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept. 
29,  1929,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

WHITEHEAD,    Joseph    Samuel, 

Bishop  of  the  Burrville  Ward,  Sevier 
Stake,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  from  1890  to 
1891,  was  born  April  1,  1848,  in  Hen- 
derson Co.,  Illinois,  the  son  of  William 
Whitehead  and  Jane  Hardman.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  July  20, 
1884,  and  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the 
Burrville  Ward  Dec.  14,  1890. 

YOUNG,  Archibald  Graham,  Bishop 
of  the  Richfield  Ward,  Sevier  Stake, 
Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  from  1899  to  1904, 
was  born  May  22,  1865,  at  Kirkintil- 
loch, Dumbartonshire,  Scotland,  the 
son  of  Archibald  Miller  Young  and 
Mary  Graham.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty March  6,  1895,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States  in  1895-1897,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  25,  1899,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


613 


Sharon  Stake 

ANDERSON,  Oscar  Hyrum,  Bishop 
of  the  Sharon  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  7,  1889,  in  Fairview,  Sanpete 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Peter  Anderson 
and  Lena  Peterson.  He  was  baptized 
July  10,  1898,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  5,  1921,  by  George  F.  Richards, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  March  10,  1929, 
by  Reed  Smoot. 

ANDERSEN,  Victor  Michael,  Bish- 
op of  the  Vineyard  Ward,  Sharon 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930  + ,  was 
born  June  29,  1879,  in  Aalborg,  Den- 
mark, a  son  of  Peter  Christian  Ander- 
sen and  Mariane  Thomine  Michaelsen. 
He  was  baptized  April  13,  1888,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1893,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Jan.  25,  1920,  by  Thom- 
as N.  Naylor  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Jan.  18,  1930,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

BIGLER,  Adelbert,  second  counsel- 
or in  the  Sharon  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  23,  1887,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Henry  William  Bigler  and 
Eleanor  Parthenia  Emmett.  He  was 
baptized  June  25,  1895,  ordained  to 
the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Ha- 
waii in  1910-1914,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  2,  1927,  by  John 
Johnson,  and  was  chosen  as  second 
counselor  Sept.  15,  1929.  He  was  set 
apart  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

BLAKE,  Samuel  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Vineyard  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1929  and  first 
counselor  in  the  Sharon  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1929  to  1930  + ,  was 
born  Oct.  12,  1885,  at  Centre  Creek, 
Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William 
Blake  and  Mary  Lake.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  12,  1885,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1906-1908,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  27,  1920, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman,  and  was  chosen 
first  counselor  in  September,  1929. 


CLARK,  James  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Timpanogas  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  20,  1886,  in  Almy,  Uinta  Co., 
Wyoming,  a  son  of  James  Henry  Clark 
and  Salma  Garrett.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  23,  1899,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Aug.  24,  1924,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

CLUFF,  Sidney  Hamer,  Bishop  of 
the  Pleasant  View  Ward,  Sharon 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  May  1,  1883,  in  Provo,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Samuel  S.  Cluff  and 
Frances  Worsley.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  15,  1891,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  27,  1919,  by  Reed  Smoot,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  17,  1925,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman. 

COLVIN,  Levi  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Pleasant  View  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1905  to  1912,  was  born 
June  12,  1857,  in  Payson,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Levi  0.  A.  Colvin  and  Mary  E, 
Davis.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  4,  1866, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1895-1897,  and  was  sustained  as  Bish- 
op Feb.  26,  1905. 

DAVIS,  Burdell,  Bishop  of  the 
Pleasant  View  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1917,  was  born 
Jan.  15,  1858,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Josuah  Davis  and  Susanna  Cole. 
He  was  baptized  in  186G,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  15,  1905,  by  John 
Henry  Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
April  28,  1912,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
He  died  May  27,  1919. 

ELLIOT,  Robert  Lester,  Bishop  of 
the  Edgemont  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1929,  was  born 
Nov.  11,  1883,  in  Richfield,  Sevier  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  W.  Elliot  and 
Sarah  Frazer.  He  was  baptized  March 
3,  1892,  ordained  a  High  Priest  April 
28,  1918,  by  Joseph  William  Knight, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  23, 
1926,  by  George  Albert  Smith. 

FERGUSON,  James  Baum,  Bishop 

of  the  Edgemont  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 


614 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Aug.  20,  1889,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Fredrick  Ferguson  and  Elizabeth 
Baum.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  14,  1898, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  23,  1926, 
by  Thomas  N.  Taylor,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Jan.  18,  1930,  by  George  Al- 
bert Smith. 

KARTCHNER,  Mark  Elisha,  Bish- 
op of  the  Grand  View  Ward,  Sharon 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1930 -f,  was 
born  June  6,  1876,  in  Panguitch,  Piute 
(now  Garfield)  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Mark  Elisha  Kartchner  and  Phebe 
Palmer.  He  was  baptized  June  6, 
1884,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1897-1900,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  28,  1922,  by 
David  0.  McKay. 

LOVELESS,  James  Anderson,  Bish- 
op of  the  Timpanogos  Ward,  Sharon 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1920  to  1924,  was 
born  Oct.  30,  1880,  in  Timpanogos, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  An- 
derson Loveless  and  Julia  Elkins.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1912- 
1914,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in 
November,  1917,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  in  March,  1920, 
by   Rudger   Clawson. 

MADSEN,  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  5th  Ward,  Sharon  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1877  to  1892,  was  born  April  6, 
1824,  in  Studsdal,  Denmark,  a  son  of 
Mads  Petersen  Madsen  and  Mette 
Marie  Madsen.  He  was  baptized  June 
12,  1853,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1856, 
was  ordained  to  the  Priesthood  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Sandwich  Is- 
lands in  1886-1888.  He  was  sustained 
as  Bishop  Oct.  13,  1877.  He  died  Jan. 
16,  1910. 

MADSEN.  Spencer,  Bishop  of  the 
Lake  View  Ward,  Sharon  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  4, 


1895,  in  Lake  View,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Peter  Madsen,  jun.,  and  Bertha  Knud- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  July  31,  1904, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  30,  1921, 
by  George  F.  Richards,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  June  3,  1928,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

POULSON,  Otto  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Timpanogos  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1920,  was  born 
April  30,  1872,  in  Helsingborg,  Mal- 
mohus  Ian,  Sweden,  a  son  of  Niels 
Poulson  and  Maria  Walstrom.  He  was 
baptized  May  26,  1883,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1882,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  25,  1917,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

PRESTWICH,  Orson,  Bishop  of  the 
Sharon  Ward,  Sharon  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1921  to  1928,  was  born  Nov.  15, 
1881,  in  Moroni,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Cyrus  W.  Prestwich  and  Lucy 
Morley.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  20, 
1891,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  July  31,  1921,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

SMOOT,  George  Morrison,  Bishop 
of  the  Vineyard  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1904  to  1908,  was  born 
Jan.  9,  1864,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Abraham  O.  Smoot  and  Anna 
Mouritzen.  He  was  baptized  in  May, 
1872,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood,  filled 
a  mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1897-1899, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1892,  and  sustained  as  Bishop 
March  27,  1904. 

STONE,  Joseph  Oliver,  Bishop  of 
the  Vineyard  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1913,  was  born 
Nov.  7,  1876,  in  Salem,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Joseph  Adams  Stone  and 
Phebe  Belinda  Taylor.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  4,  1884,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  22,  1904,  by  James  W.  Pax- 
man,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  March  13, 
1908,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

TAYLOR,  William  Weldon,  Bishop 
of  the  Lake  View  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


615 


Utah,  from  1915  to  1928,  was  born 
Dec.  9,  1883,  in  Provo,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Joseph  Taylor  and 
Abbie  Jane  Scott.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia in  1912-1914,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Joseph  B.  Keeler,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  24,  1915,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

VARLEY,  William,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Vineyard  Ward,  Sharon  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1913  to  1920,  was  born 
Dec.  11,  1861,  in  Bountiful,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  Varley  and 
Mary  Ellen  McDough.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  25,  1877,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  14,  1904,  by  David  John, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  19,  1913, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

WATKINS,  Arthur  Vivian,  presi- 
dent of  the  Sharon  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1929  to  1930+ ,  was  born  Dec.  18, 
1886,  in  Midway,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Arthur  Watkins  and  Emily 
A.  Gerber.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  ordained  to  the 
Priesthood,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States,  and  was  set  apart  as 
president  Sept.  14,  1929,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards. 


Shelley  Stake 


ARAVE,  Joseph  Clarence,  Bishop  of 
the  Taylor  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  14,  1891,  in  Taylor,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  David  Eli  Arave  and  Mary  Ann 
Fowles.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  13, 
1902,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  31, 
1914,  by  Joseph  H.  Dye,  and  a  Bishop 
Feb.  2,  1930,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

CHRISTENSEN,     Erastus     Milton, 

second  counselor  in  the  presidency  of 
the  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924 
to  1929,  was  born  July  5,  1889,  in 
Fountain  Green,  Utah,  a  son  of  Anton 


Erastus  Christensen  and  Anna  Chris- 
tine Jensen.  He  was  baptized  July  5, 
1897,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  20, 
1922,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith,  and  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  of  the  Shelley  1st 
Ward  June  4,  1922.  He  held  that  po- 
sition until  Feb.  17,  1924,  when  he 
was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

COOK,  John  W.,  Bishop  of  the  Tay- 
lor Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1926  to  1929,  was  born  Sept.  18,  1872, 
in  Taylorsville,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas 
Cook  and  Mary  Ellen  Normington.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1880,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  9,  1924,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

COX,  Eli  Ashton,  Bishop  of  the 
Jameston  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1924  to  1930  + ,  was  born  March 
22,  1898,  in  Taylor,  Idaho,  a  son  of 
Levi  Cox  and  Elnora  Arave.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  2,  1906,  ordained  an 
Elder  Dec.  29,  1919,  by  Isaac  Soren- 
sen,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northwest- 
ern States  in  1920-1922,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  May  21,  1922,  by  Ste- 
phen L.  Richards,  and  sustained  as 
Bishop  April  13,  1924. 

CUTLER,  Edwin,  Bishop  of  the 
Shelley  1st  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1909  to  1912,  was  born  April 
12,  1868,  in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Royal  J.  Cutler  and  Theda  A. 
Martin.  He  was  baptized  in  1877,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  15,  1892,  by 
Thomas  Chamberlain,  and  a  Bishop 
Aug.  7,  1909,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

DAVIS,  Francis  Marion,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Shelley  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  July  9,  1883,  in  Pro- 
vo, Utah,  a  son  of  James  Davis  and 
Elizabeth  Hodson.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  3,  1892,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1905-1908,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  21,  1915, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith  and  presided 
over  the  Shelley  1st  Ward  until  1922. 


616 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


EARL,  Milton  Wilson,  Bishop  of  the 
Taylor  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1921  to  1926,  was  born  Nov.  26, 
1875,  in  Farmington,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Milton  W.  Earl  and  Sophrona  Hess. 
He  was  baptized  April  21,  1893,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  17,  1919, 
by  Joseph  H.  Dye,  and  a  Bishop  Nov. 
20,  1921,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

ESPLIN,  Marion,  Bishop  of  the 
Shelley  1st  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  1,  1880,  in  Orderville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  James  Esplin.  He  was 
baptized  in  1888,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  5,  1918,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  17,  1924, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun, 

FERGUSON,  Elmer  C,  Bishop  of 
the  Taylor  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1919  to  1921,  was  born  Aug. 
11,  1887,  in  Bingham  Canyon,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  C.  Ferguson  and  Rose 
Forbes.  He  was  baptized  in  June, 
1908,  as  a  convert  to  "Mormonism," 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  19,  1917, 
by  Jos.  H.  Dye,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  16, 
1919,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

FUGAL,  James  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Woodville  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1910  to  1916,  was  born  Nov.  15, 
1875,  in  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Christian  Fugl  and  Margaret  Jen- 
sen. He  was  baptized  Aug.  2,  1885, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  13,  1910, 
by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

HAMMER,  Jasper  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodville  Ward,  Shelley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1904  to  1906,  was  born 
Sept.  2,  1871,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Austin  Hammer  and  Sarah 
Jane  Payne.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  acted  as  presiding 
Elder  at  Woodville  from  1894  to  1904, 
and  was  sustained  as  Bishop  July  24, 
1904,  when  the  branch  was  organized 
as  a  ward. 


MARKER,  Ernest,  Bishop  of  the 
Taylor  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1914  to  1919,  was  born  March 
30,  1872,  at  Taylorsville,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Job  Harker  and  Mary  Griffiths.  He 
was  baptized  June  5,  1890,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Central  and  Southern 
States  in  1903-1904,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Oct.  13,  1907,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  16, 
1914,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HOLLAND,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the 
Shelley  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1906  to  1909,  was  born  Oct.  29, 
1867,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
Holland  and  Mary  Burton.  He  was 
baptized  in  1877,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  10,  1902,  by  Geo.  Teasdale, 
and  a  Bishop  Jan.  14,  1906,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

HUMPHERYS,  Oliver,  Bishop  of 
the  Shelley  2nd  Ward,  Shelley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Jan.  12,  1888,  in  Dingle,  Idaho,  a  son 
of  Samuel  Humpherys  and  Hannah 
Martha  Clifton.  He  was  baptized  in 
June,  1896,  ordained  an  Elder  in  Octo- 
ber, 1908,  by  his  father,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  New  Zealand  in  1908-1912,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  17,  1924, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  a  Bishop 
Nov.  3,  1929,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

JENSEN,  Rulou  M.,  Bishop  of  the 
Basalt  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1928  to  1930,  was  born  Jan.  26, 
1897,  in  Orderville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Lewis  R.  Jensen  and  Marie  Sorensen. 
He  was  baptized  May  8,  1905,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
4,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard.  He 
died  April  13,  1930,  in  Idaho  Falls. 

LARSEN,  Jacob  Raphael,  Bishop  of 
the  Goshen  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  6,  1892,  in  Mt.  Pleasant,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Andrew  Larsen  and  Christina 
Mathesen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  15, 
1903,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  17, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


617 


1924,  and  a  Bishop  May  5,  1929,  by 
Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

LARSEN,  James  Berkeley,  presi- 
dent of  the  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  27,  1889, 
in  Mt.  Pleasant,  Utah,  a  son  of  Andrew 
Larsen  and  Christina  Mathesen.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1897,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  27,  1916, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

LYON,  John  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the 
Firth  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1924  to  1980 +  ,  was  born  April 
10,  1881,  in  Fairview,  Idaho,  a  son  of 
Charles  Lyon  and  Mary  Balls.  He 
was  baptized  in  May,  1897,  ordained 
an  Elder  Oct.  12,  1902,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1905- 
1907,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
19,  1917,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith,  and  a 
Bishop  Nov.  10,  1924,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

MALLORY,  Warren  James,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Shelley  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1914  to 
1924,  was  born  Oct.  23,  1868,  in  Mont- 
pelier,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Charles  Henry 
Mallory  and  Caroline  M.  T.  Lesueur 
He  was  baptized  in  1879,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Aug.  23,  1903,  by  Elijah 
M.  Freeman,  and  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  in  the  stake  presidency  Aug. 
16,  1914,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

MECHAM,  Moroni,  Bishop  of  the 
Kimball  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1905  to  1909,  was  born  March 
25,  1868,  in  Richville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Leonidas  Clinton  Mecham  and  Mar- 
garet E.  Champlean.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  April,  1876,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  21,  1905, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

M  E  R  K  L  E  Y,    Christopher   Amos, 

Bishop  of  the  Kimball  Ward,  Shelley 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1909  to  1910,  was 
born  Feb.  28,  1859,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Christopher  Merkley 


and  Harissa  Fairbanks.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  August,  1867,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  15,  1899,  by  Geo.  Osmond, 
and  a  Bishop  Dec.  26,  1909,  by  John 
Henry  Smith.     He  died  Aug.  4,  1935. 

PASKETT,  Philip  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Basalt  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1924  to  1928,  was  born  Dec.  9, 
1878,  in  Grouse  Creek,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Philip  Paskett  and  Emma  Richins.  He 
was  baptized  July  17,  1887,  and  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  June  15,  1924. 

RIDER,  John  McDonald,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodville  Ward,  Shelley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1906  to  1910,  was  born 
April  23,  1868,  in  Big  Cottonwood, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Rider  and  Nancy 
McDonald.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  30,  1904,  and  a  Bishop  Jan.  14, 
1906,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

RISENMAY,  George  Henry,  Bishop 
of  the  Woodville  Ward,  Shelley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  27,  1890,  in  Logan,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Christian  Risenmay  and  Wilhelm- 
ina  Closner.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  1, 
1898,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  19, 
1916,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a  Bish- 
op Nov.  4,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

SHELLEY,  John  Franklin,  Bishop 
of  the  Shelley  Ward,  Shelley  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1895  to  1906,  was  born 
Aug.  30,  1862,  in  American  Fork, 
Utah.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Feb. 
10,   1895,  by  Heber  J.   Grant. 

SORENSEN,  Lars,  Bishop  of  the 
Goshen  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1900  to  1906,  was  born  April  24, 
1856,  in  Holbak,  Denmark,  a  son  of 
Jens  Sorensen  and  Johanna  Johanne- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  April  24,  1870, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1874,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  24,  1900,  by  Heber  J.  Grant.  He 
died  Jan.  29, 1926. 


618 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


STUTZNEGGER,  John  Creswell, 
Bishop  of  the  Kimball  Ward,  Shelley 
Stake,  Idaho,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  23,  1899,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Stutznegger  and  Rachel 
A.  King.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1, 
1908,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  15, 
1927,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bish- 
op May  4,  1930,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

TAYLOR,  William  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Kimball  Ward,  Shelley  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1910  to  1930,  was  born  Dec.  14, 
1876,  in  Cottonwood,  Utah,  a  son  of 
James  A.  Taylor  and  Sarah  L.  Boyes. 
He  was  baptized  June  4,  1885,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Society  Islands  in 
1898-1901,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  4,  1907,  by  Elias  S.  Kimball,  and 
a  Bishop  Aug.  14,  1910,  by  Charles 
W.  Penrose. 


Snowflake  Stake 

BREWER,  Albert  Joseph,  Bishop  of 
the  Pinedale  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1916  to  1921,  was  born 
Nov.  9,  1871,  in  Big  Cottonwood,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Joseph  Smith  Brewer  and 
Betsy  Crandell.  He  was  baptized  in 
1884,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  10, 
1901,  by  Jesse  N.  Smith,  and  a  Bishop 
May  12,  1917,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

BRIMHALL,  Logan,  Bishop  of  the 
Taylor  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake,  Ariz- 
ona, from  1925  to  1930,  was  born  Oct. 
12,  1892,  in  Mesa,  Arizona,  a  son  of 
Norman  Andrew  Brimhall  and  Mary 
Agnes  Willis.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
12,  1900,  ordained  an  Elder  May  17, 
]'Jl4,  by  his  father,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northwestern  States  in  1914-1916, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  April  21,  1925,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

BRINK  ERHOFF,  David,  Bishop  of 
the  Tuba  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, Ariz- 
ona, from  1886  to  1900,  was  born  May 
22,  lHo5,  at  Centerville,  Utah,  a  son 
of  James  Brinkerhoff  and  Eliza  Jane 


Henderson.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  ordained  a  Bishop  in 
1886,  by  Jesse  N.  Smith,  and  when 
the  settlement  of  Tuba  was  broken 
up  in  1903,  because  of  claims  made 
by  the  Indians  as  to  the  lands,  he 
moved  to  Woodruff,  Arizona,  while 
others  of  the  saints  removed  to  dif- 
ferent settlements. 

CAMPBELL,   Archibald,  Bishop  of 

the  Winslow  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Feb.  28,  1897,  in  Snowflake,  the 
son  of  Franklin  Campbell  and  Annie 
Frost.  He  was  baptized  July  3,  1904, 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1915,  filled  a 
mission  to  New  Zealand  in  1915-1919, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  21,  1927,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

DECKER,  Zachariah  B.,  jun..  Bish- 
op of  the  Taylor  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1894  to  1904, 
was  born  March  11,  1850,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Zachariah  B. 
Decker  and  Nancy  Bean.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eleven  years  old,  called 
the  Arizona  Mission  in  1881,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Jan.  5,  1894,  by  Brigham  Young,  jun. 
He  died  April  20,  1903. 

DENHAM,    Virgil   Tillman,    Bishop 

of  the  Shumway  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  2,  1894,  in  Shumway, 
a  son  of  Franklin  P.  Denham  and  Dicia 
Ann  Wood.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  2, 
1902,  ordained  an  Elder  May  17,  1914, 
by  James  J.  Shumway,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northwestern  States  in  1914- 
1916,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  May  8,  1928,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 

DENHAM,  Walter  Hampton,  Bish- 
op of  the  Shumway  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1919  to  1927,  was 
born  Aug.  31,  1885,  in  Boles,  Monroe 
Co.,  Kentucky,  a  son  of  Franklin  P. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


619 


Denhani  and  Dicia  Ann  Wood.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  1,  1893,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  13,  1915,  by 
James  M.  Flake,  and  a  Bishop  April 
24,  1919. 

ELLSWORTH,  Leo,  Bishop  of  the 
Lakeside  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1918  to  1920,  was  born 
Jan.  9,  1890,  in  Mesa,  Arizona,  a  son 
of  Wallace  W.  Ellsworth  and  Martha 
Passey.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  May  11,  1918,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

FARR,  Willard  Ballantyne,  Bishop 
of  the  Holbrook  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  in  1920,  was  born  Nov. 
10,  1888,  in  St.  Johns,  Arizona,  a  son 
of  Willard  Farr  and  Mary  E.  Ballan- 
tyne. He  was  baptized  Dec.  5,  1896, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
July  24,  1920,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

FISH,  John  Lazelle,  Bishop  of  the 
Lakeside  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Ariz.,  from  1920  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  28,  1868,  in  Parowan,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Joseph  Fish  and  Mary  C.  Stelle. 
He  was  baptized  June  27,  1877,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  24,  1920,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

FISH,  Silas  L.,  Bishop  of  the  Snow- 
flake  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1910  to  1916,  was  born  Jan.  17, 
1880,  in  Snowflake,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Fish  and  Adelaide  M.  Smith.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  17,  1888,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Dec.  28,  1900,  by  Geo.  Reynolds, 
filled  a  mission  to  Samoa  in  1900-1904, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  15,  1910,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

HANSEN,  Hans,  Bishop  of  the 
Showlow  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1884  to  1903,  was  born 
April  4,  1837,  in  Karlebo,  Fredriks- 
borg  amt,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Niels 
Hansen  and  Mette   Kjerstine  Larsen. 


He  was  baptized  June  24,  1855,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1856,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
13,  1884,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He 
died  Sept.  19,  1909. 

HATCH,  Ezra  Rosco,  Bishop  of  the 
Holbrook  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1917  to  1920,  was  born  Oct. 
30,  1888,  at  Taylor,  Arizona,  a  son  of 
John  Hatch  and  Mary  Jane  Standifird. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  5,  1896,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
11,  1917,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

HUNT,  William  Ammon,  Bishop  of 
the  Clay  Springs  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1921  to  1930-f , 
was  born  June  9,  1887,  in  Pine,  Ari- 
zona, the  son  of  Alma  Moroni  Hunt 
and  Rosetta  Smutz.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  8,  1895,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  7,  1922,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

LARSON,  Alof  Pratt,  Bishop  of  the 
Lakeside  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake,  Ari- 
zona, from  1912  to  1916,  was  born  Nov. 
7,  1882,  in  Snowflake,  the  son  of  Alof 
Larson  and  May  Hunt.  He  was  bap- 
tized Dec.  4,  1890,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  1,  1912,  by  Hy- 
rum  M.  Smith. 

MILLER,  John  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Holbrook  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1915  to  1917,  was  born 
June  3,  1887,  in  Snowflake,  Arizona, 
a  son  of  Ninian  Miller  and  Sarah  E. 
Kartchner.  He  was  baptized  June  3, 
1896,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Feb.  15,  1915,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

PERKINS,  Reuben  Josiah,  presiding 
Elder  of  Walker  (Clay  Springs) 
Branch,  Snowflake  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1916  to  1919,  was  born  in  Octo- 
ber, 1856,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Jesse  N.  Perkins.  He  was  baptized 
Dec.  15,  1866,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  6,  1908,  by  James  M.  Flake,  and 


620 


LATTER-DAY   SAINT 


set  apart  as  presiding  Elder  May  21, 
1916,  by  Samuel  F.  Smith.  Elder  Per- 
kins died  Sept.  7,  1919. 

PETERSEN,  Joseph  Lorenzo,  Bish- 
op of  the  Pinedale  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1914  to  1916, 
was  born  Dec,  11,  1887,  in  Pinedale,  a 
son  of  Niels  Petersen  and  Marie  Mor- 
tensen.  He  was  baptized  May  18, 1896, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  30,  1914,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

SAVAGE,  Levi  Mathers,  Bishop  of 
the  Woodruff  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1891  to  1918,  was  born 
Jan.  11,  1851,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Levi  Savage  and  Jane  Ma- 
thers. He  was  baptized  July  15,  1860, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Sept.  23,  1878,  by  Erastus  Snow,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Sunset 
Ward.  He  was  set  apart  as  Bishop  of 
the  Woodruff  Ward  Oct.  19,  1891,  by 
John  Henry  Smith.  Bishop  Savage 
died  March  15,  1935. 

SHUMWAY,  James  Jardine,  Bishop 
of  the  Taylor  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Ariz.,  from  1904  to  1910,  was  born 
Feb.  21,  1866,  in  Mendon,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Chas.  Shumway  and  Elizabeth  Jar- 
dine.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  21,  1874, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  31,  1904,  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley. 

SHUMWAY,  James  Lester,  Bishop 
of  the  Taylor  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1918  to  1920,  was  born 
Sept.  18,  1890,  in  Taylor,  a  son  of 
James  J.  Shumway  and  Nettie  Hatch. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  18,  1898,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  11,  1918,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

SHUMWAY,  Levi  M.,  Bishop  of  the 
Taylor  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake,  Ariz., 
from  1915  to  1918,  was  born  Nov.  15, 
1859,  in  Wellsville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  Shumway  and  Louisa  Min- 
nersley.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  30,  1904,  by  Jesse  N.  Smith, 


and  a  Bishop  Aug.  13,  1915,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

SHUMWAY,  Wallace  Everett,  Bish- 
op of  the  Shumway  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1915  to  1919,  was 
born  May  15,  1879,  in  Upper  Kanab, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Wilson  G.  Shumway 
and  Maria  Averett.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  3,  1887,  ordained  a  Seventy  Sept. 
19,  1906,  by  Brigham  H.  Roberts,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1908-1910,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  13,  1915,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

SHUMWAY,  William  Howard,  Bish- 
op of  the  Snowflake  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arzona,  from  1916  to  1919,  was 
born  July  20,  1877,  in  Johnson,  Kane 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  Shumway 
and  Elizabeth  Jardine.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  4,  1886,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  15,  1909,  by  Samuel  F. 
Smith,  and  a  Bishop  May  13,  1916,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

STANDIFIRD,  Lorenzo,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Walker  (Clay  Springs) 
Branch,  Snowflake  Stake,  Arizona, 
from  1920  to  1921,  was  born  May  23, 
1881,  in  Taylor,  Arizona,  a  son  of  John 
Henry  Standifird  and  Mary  Argyle. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1889,  and  set 
apart  as  presiding  Elder  Jan.  24,  1920, 
by  Samuel  F.  Smith. 

THOMAS,  Elijah,  jun.,  Bishop  of 
the  Pinedale  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  24,  1876,  at  Leeds,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Elijah  Murray  Thomas  and 
Emily  Hampton.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  14,  1885,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  30,  1914,  by  David  O.  McKay, 
and  a  Bishop  Nov.  1,  1921,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

THOMAS,  Elijah  Murray,  Bishop 
of  the  Pinedale  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1902  to  1914,  was 
born  April  26,  1852,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


621 


Utah,  a  son  of  Elijah  Thomas  and  Ann 
Heywood.  He  was  baptized  by  Mosiah 
Hancock,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Sept.  21,  1902. 

WAKEFIELD,  Lansing  Ira,  Bishop 
of  the  Taylor  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1920  to  1925,  was  born 
Nov.  8,  1878,  in  Brigham  City,  Ariz., 
a  son  of  Joseph  Buck  Wakefield  and 
Aretha  M.  Bates.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  14,  1886,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  18,  1920,  by  Samuel  F.  Smith, 
and  a  Bishop  July  24,  1920,  by  Orson 
F.   Whitney. 

WESTOVER,  John  Lycurgus,  Bish- 
op of  the  Joseph  City  Ward,  Snowflake 
Stake,  Arizona,  from  1916  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  4,  1880,  in  Joseph  City, 
a  son  of  Henry  W.  Despain  and  Joanna 
M.  Erickson.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  5, 
1888,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  28, 
1913,  by  Samuel  F.  Smith,  and  a  Bish- 
op May  13,  1916,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 
He  filled  a  short  term  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1929-1930. 

WILLIAMS,  Orlando  Clements, 

Bishop  of  the  Holbrook  Ward,  Snow- 
flake  Stake,  Arizona,  from  1920  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  June  21,  1894,  in  Du- 
blan,  Mexico,  a  son  of  Frederick  S. 
Williams  and  Nancy  A.  Clements.  He 
was  baptized  June  21,  1902,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  24,  1920,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  31,  1920, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

WILLIS,  John  Lorenzo,  Bishop  of 
the  Showlow  Ward,  Snowflake  Stake, 
Arizona,  from  1919  to  1930  + ,  was 
born  Feb.  27,  1882,  in  Snowflake,  Ariz., 
a  son  of  John  Henry  Willis  and  Fannie 
Jane  Roundy.  He  was  baptized  June 
5,  1890,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  April  24,  1919,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 


South  Davis  Stake 

BARLOW,  Wilford  Walter,  Bishop 
of  the  Bountiful  1st  Ward,  South  Davis 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1909  to  1915,  was 
born  Oct.  26, 1880,  in  Centerville,  Davis 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wilford  W.  Barlow 
and  Laura  Jackson.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Feb.  14,  1909,  by  Joseph 
H.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop  March  27, 1909, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

BROWNELL,  Gideon,  Bishop  of  the 
Farmington  Ward,  South  Davis  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1851  to  1855,  was  born  May 
5,  1789,  in  Rutland  Co.,  Vermont.  He 
was  appointed  Bishop  Jan.  21,  1851,  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young. 

CALL,  Anson,  Bishop  of  the  Bounti- 
ful Ward,  South  Davis  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1849  to  1851,  and  again  Bishop 
of  said  Ward  from  1874  to  1877,  was 
born  May  13,  1810,  in  Thatcher,  Ver- 
mont, a  son  of  Cyril  Call  and  Sally 
Tiff'any.  He  was  baptized  May  21, 
1834,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1848,  and 
was  appointed  Bishop  in  the  fall  of 
1849.     He  died  Aug.  31,  1890, 

COX,  Orville  Sutherland,  Bishop  of 
the  Bountiful  Ward,  South  Davis 
Stake,  Utah,  in  1849,  was  born  Nov. 
25,  1814,  in  the  state  of  New  York. 
He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  in  1849.  He 
died  July  4,  1888. 

GRANT,  Joseph  Hyrum,  president 
of  the  Davis  Stake,  Utah,  from  1902 
to  1915,  was  born  Oct.  17,  1853,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jedediah  M. 
Grant  and  Susan  Noble.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  17,  1861,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  22,  1877,  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards,  served  as  Bishop  of  the  West 
Bountiful  Ward  from  1885  to  1890,  and 
as  second  counselor  in  the  Davis  Stake 
presidency  from  1894  to  1902.  He  died 
Nov.  17,  1917. 

MOSS,  William,  Bishop  of  the  West 
Bountiful  Ward,  South  Davis  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1909  to  1915,  was  born 
June  21,  1855,  in  Bountiful,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Moss  and  Rebecca 
Wood.    He  was  baptized  June  21, 1863, 


622 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
March  27,  1909,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 
He  died  Nov.  8,  1933. 

PORTER,  Sanford,  Bishop  of  the 
Centerville  Ward,  South  Davis  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1852  to  1855,  was  born 
March  7,  1790,  in  Brimfield,  Massachu- 
setts, a  son  of  Nathan  Porter  and  Su- 
sannah West.  He  was  baptized  in 
1831,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1847,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  7,  1852. 

ROSE,  Armond  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
the  North  Farmington  Ward,  South 
Davis  Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1924, 
was  born  Oct.  20,  1869,  in  Farmington, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Alley  S.  Rose  and  Elvira 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  July  27,  1879, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  April  13,  1922, 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bishop 
March  27,  1923,  by  Heber  J.  Grant.  He 
filled  two  missions  to  the  Southern 
States.  He  was  accidentally  killed 
Oct.  5,  1924. 

STRINGHAM,  Jedediah,  Bishop  of 
the  Bountiful  2nd  Ward,  South  Davis 
Stake,  from  1909  to  1924,  was  born 
May  2,  1861,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Briant  Stringham  and  Martha 
Ashby.  He  was  baptized  when  nine 
years  old,  ordained  to  the  Priesthood, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1896-1898,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  James  S.  Eldredge,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  March  27,  1909,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

STRINGHAM,  Richard,  second 
counselor  in  the  South  Davis  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930  + , 
and  Bishop  of  the  Bountiful  1st  Ward 
from  1918  to  1924,  was  born  June  7, 
1870,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Briant  Stringham  and  Martha  Ash- 
by.  He  was  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor March  23,  1924,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

WELLING,  George  Albert,  Bishop 
of  the  North  Farmington  Ward,  South 


Davis  Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  11,  1875,  in 
Farmington,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Job  Welling  and  Phebe  L.  Holmes.  He 
was  baptized  July  27,  1884,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in  1897- 
1899,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan. 
9,  1925,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

WINEGAR,  Thomas  Edwin,  Bishop 
of  the  West  Bountiful  Ward,  South 
Davis  Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  March  15,  1890,  in 
West  Bountiful,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  W.  Winegar  and  Myra 
Pace.  He  was  baptized  April  2,  1898, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1911-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
June  24,  1923,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 


South  Sanpete  Stake 

ALLRED,  Reuben  Warren,  Bishop 
of  the  Ephraim  Ward,  South  Sanpete 
Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from  1854  to 
1855,  was  born  Nov.  18,  1815,  in  Bed- 
ford County,  Tennessee,  a  son  of 
James  Allred  and  Elizabeth  Warren. 
He  came  to  Utah  in  1849,  and  was 
appointed  Bishop  in  1854. 

ANDERSEN,  Lars  Strib,  Bishop  of 
the  Ephraim  North  Ward,  South  San- 
pete Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1877  to  1889,  was  born  April  16,  1829, 
at  Avlby,  Odense  amt,  Fyen,  Denmark, 
a  son  of  Anders  Larsen  and  Anne  Ka- 
trine Hansen.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
6,  1852,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
17,  1867,  filled  a  mission  to  Scandin- 
avia in  1873-1875,  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op July  4,  1877,  and  filled  another  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1887-1889. 

BEAL,  Thomas  Andrew,  Bishop  of 
the  Ephraim  North  Ward,  South  San- 
pete Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1912  to  1914,  was  born  July  20,  1874, 
in  Ephraim,  Utah,  a  son  of  Henry  Beal 
and  Christine  Bjerggaard.  He  was 
baptized    in    1882,    ordained    a    High 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


623 


Priest  Dec.  31,  1911,  by  Lewis  Ander- 
son, and  ordained  S  Bishop  Feb.  3, 
1912,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

CHASE,  John  Darwin,  Bishop  of  the 
Ephraim  Ward,  South  Sanpete  Stake, 
Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  in  1856,  was  born 
Aug.  10,  1815,  at  Bristol,  Addison  Co., 
Vermont,  a  son  of  Abner  Chase  and 
Amy  Scott.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  1, 
1840,  filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1861-1863,  and  was  set  apart  to  preside 
over  the  Ephraim  Ward  Jan.  8,  1856, 
by  Erastus  Snow. 

DORIUS,  John  Nikolai,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  South 
Sanpete  Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
from  1922  to  1924,  was  born  March  26, 
1876,  in  Ephraim,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Carl  C.  N.  Dorius  and  Julia 
Petrine  Peterson.  He  was  baptized 
July  14,  1884,  ordained  a  Seventy  in 
1910,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern 
States  in  1919-1920,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  the  South  Sanpete  Stake 
presidency  Feb.  5,  1922,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

EDWARDS,  Caleb  Gibbons,  Bishop 
of  the  Ephraim  Ward,  South  San- 
pete Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1859  to  1867,  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  11,  1859,  George  A.  Smith  and 
Amasa  M.  Lyman  being  present. 

EVERETT,  Elijah,  Bishop  of  the 
Ephraim  Wai'd,  South  Sanpete  Stake, 
Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from  1855  to  1856, 
a  son  of  Elijah  Everett,  was  sustained 
as  Bishop  of  the  Ephraim  Ward  Jan. 
28,  1855. 

HANSEN,  Joseph  N.,  Bishop  of  the 
Ephraim  North  Ward,  South  Sanpete 
Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from  1926 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  29,  1894,  at 
Ephraim,  Utah,  a  son  of  Anders  Nik- 
olai Hansen  and  Jensine  Christine 
Petersen.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  12, 
1883,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  26, 
1914,  by  Joseph  Y.  Jensen,  and  ordain- 


ed a  Bishop  Nov.  21,  1926,  by  Joseph 
F.  Smith,  jun. 

HENRIE,  Alphonso,  Bishop  of  the 
Manti  Center  Ward,  South  Sanpete 
Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  in  1930  +  , 
was  born  Feb.  21,  1894,  in  Manti,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Jerome  B.  Henrie  and  Thea 
Lund.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  16,  1902, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  12,  1923, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Aug.  31,  1930,  by  Pres.  Heber 
J.  Grant. 

JENSEN,  Peter  Daniel,  Bishop  of 
the  Ephraim  South  Ward,  South  San- 
pete Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1917  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  May  17, 1869, 
at  Ephraim,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jens  P. 
Jensen  and  Dorthea  Gregerson.  He 
was  baptized  July  29,  1877,  and  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  2, 
1918,  by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

KOFOED,  Paul  Ernst,  Bishop  of 
the  Ephraim  Ward,  South  Sanpete 
Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from  1856 
to  1859,  was  born  June  7,  1811  or  1813, 
on  the  Isle  of  Bornholm,  Denmark.  As 
a  sailor  he  crossed  the  Atlantic  23 
times.  He  was  baptized  in  the  summer 
of  1847,  was  appointed  to  preside  as  a 
Bishop  over  the  Ephraim  Ward  by 
Erastus  Snow  in  1856,  but  was  never 
ordained  a  Bishop. 

LOWRY,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Salt  }\ 
Lake  City  2nd  Ward  from  1849-1850, 
and  Bishop  of  the  Manti  Ward,  South 
Sanpete  Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
from  1850  to  1855,  was  born  Aug.  10, 
1799,  at  Nashville,  Tennessee,  a  son  of 
William  Lowry  and  Polly  Norris. 
"Bishop  Lowry's"  name  appears  for 
the  first  time  as  Bishop  of  the  Manti 
settlement  under  date  of  Aug.  26, 
1850.     He  died  Jan.  7,  1867. 

LUDVIGSON,  Eric,  Bishop  of  the 
Stirling  Ward,  South  Sanpete  Stake, 
Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from  1920  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  22,  1872,  in 
Manti,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Eric 


624 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Ludvigson  and  Anna  L.  Steck.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  7,  1881,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1910-1912,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  3,  1919, 
by  Anthony  W.  Ivins,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  May  1,  1920,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

MOFFITT,  Andrew  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Manti  Ward,  South  Sanpete  Stake, 
Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from  1861  to  1874, 
was  born  May  7,  1818,  at  Inniskillen, 
County  Fermanagh,  Ireland,  the  son  of 
James  and  Isabella  Moffitt.  He  was 
baptized  July  24,  1852,  and  was  install- 
ed as  Bishop  April  21,  1861. 

PEACOCK,  John  Lowry,  Bishop  of 
the  Stirhng  Ward,  South  Sanpete 
Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from  1884 
to  1891,  was  born  Aug.  5,  1855,  at 
Manti,  Utah,  the  son  of  George  Pea- 
cock and  Mary  A.  Lowry.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  11,  1877, 
by  Erastus  Snow  and  appointed  Bish- 
op of  the  Stirling  Ward  in  1884. 

PETERSON,  Peter  Canute,  Bishop 
of  the  Ephraim  West  Ward,  South 
Sanpete  Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
from  1923  to  1930 -f,  was  born  Feb. 
23,  1876,  at  Ephraim,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Peter  Cornelius  Petersen  and  Hanna 
Thomson.  He  was  baptized  June  22, 
1884,  ordained  a  Seventy  in  May,  1920, 
by  Anthon  H.  Lund,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  4,  1923, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

PETTY,  William  George,  Bishop  of 
Petty ville  (Stirling)  Ward,  South  San- 
pete Stake,  Sanpete  Co.-,  Utah,  from 
1877  to  1884,  was  born  Sept.  3,  1831, 
in  Henry  County,  Tennessee.  He  was 
.sustained  as  Bishop  of  Pettyville  July 
11,  1877,  and  set  apart  by  Erastus 
Snow, 

REID,  Edgar  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Manti  North  Ward,  South  Sanpete 
.Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from  1923  to 


1930 +  ,  was  born  March  13,  1877,  at 
Manti,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  T. 
Reid  and  Mary  Adelaide  Cox.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  5,  1923,  by  George  F.  Richards. 

STOTT,  Charles  Orval,  Bishop  of 
the  Manti  Center  Ward,  South  Sanpete 
Stake,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  from  1923 
to  1930,  was  born  May  14,  1894,  at 
Meadow,  Millai'd  Co.,  Utah,  the  son 
of  William  H.  Stott  and  Hannah  Neild. 
He  was  baptized  when  about  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
5,  1922,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  12,  1923,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 


South  Sevier  Stake 

ANDERSEN,  Erastus  Snow,  presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Marysvale  Branch, 
South  Sevier  Stake,  Utah,  from  1917 
to  1920,  was  boi-n  Jan.  29,  1865,  a  son 
of  James  C.  Andersen.  He  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Dec.  17,  1916,  by 
Robert  D.  Young  and  became  presiding 
Elder  Oct.  8,  1917. 

ANDERSON,  Carlos  Ozroe,  Bishop 
of  the  Inverury  Ward,  South  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  May  26,  1892,  in  Greenwich,  Piute 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Carlos  C.  Anderson 
and  Minnie  Tervort.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  August,  1901,  filled  a  mission 
to  France  in  1913-1915,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Oct.  17,  1920,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Jan.  30,  1921,  by  Rich- 
ard R.  Lyman. 

BAKER,  Stephen  Martindale,  Bish- 
op of  the  Sevier  Ward,  South  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  April  24,  1891,  in  Joseph,  Sevier 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Orange  T.  Baker. 
He  was  baptized  June  9,  1900,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
15,  1927,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

BREDSGAARD,  Ingvard  Carl,  Bish- 
op of  the  Monroe  South  Ward,  South 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


625 


Sevier  Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1927, 
was  born  Jan.  15,  1874,  in  Aarhus, 
Denmark,  a  son  of  Jacob  Bredsgaard 
and  Anna  Nielsen.  He  was  baptized 
in  1889,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1891, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  20, 
1922,  by  David  O.  McKay,  and  ordain- 
ed a  Bishop  Oct.  24,  1926,  by  the  same 
Apostle. 

CAMERON,  Allen,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Marysvale  Branch,  South  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1910  to  1916,  and 
Bishop  of  the  Marysvale  Ward  from 
1916  to  1917,  was  born  April  8,  1885, 
in  Panguitch,  Garfield  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Benjamin  Cameron  and  Sarah  Eliz- 
abeth Allen.  He  was  baptized  June  18, 
1893,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1904-1906,  was  sustained  as 
presiding  Elder  Feb.  26,  1911,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  17,  1916,  by 
Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

DANIELS,  William  Spafford,  Bish- 
op of  the  Annabella  Ward,  South  Se- 
vier Stake,  Utah,  from  1911  to  1920, 
was  born  Jan.  10,  1883,  in  Provo,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Joseph  E.  Daniels  and  Lilian 
Spafford.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  5, 
1891,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  15,  1911,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

FOISY,  Ivan  Louis,  Bishop  of  the 
Marysvale  Ward,  South  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  8,  1896,  in  Marysvale,  Piute  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Edward  Foisy  and  Cath- 
erine L.  Beckstead.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  12,  1905,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1917-1919,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  20,  1921,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Feb.  18,  1923,  by  George  Albert 
Smith. 

GREENWOOD,     Barnard     Hartley, 

Bishop  of  the  Inverury  Ward,  South 
Sevier  Stake,  Utah,  from  1882  to  1905, 
was  born  Sept.  21,  1849,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam Greenwood  and  Ann  Hartley.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  15  years  old. 


emigrated  to  Utah  in  1852,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Albert  K 
Thurber,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Jr  .. 
10,  1882,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

GREENWOOD,  Carlos  Barnard, 

Bishop  of  the  Inverury  Ward,  South 
Sevier  Stake,  Utah,  from  1905  to  1909, 
was  born  Oct.  31,  1879,  in  Inverury, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Barnard  H.  Greenwood 
and  Eunice  Howd.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1902-1904, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  17,  1905,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

HANSEN,  Wilford,  second  counsel- 
or in  the  South  Sevier  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  April  17, 1889,  in  Richfield,  Sevier 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Hans  and  Fannie 
Hansen.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  6, 
1900,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  22,  1911, 
by  Rulon  S.  Wells,  filled  a  mission  to 
New  Zealand  in  1922-1924,  was  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  April  18,  1920,  by 
Lars  P.  Hansen,  ordained  a  Bishop 
of  the  Monroe  North  Ward  Nov.  8, 
1925,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  May  13, 
1928,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

HARRIS,  Dennison  Lot,  Bishop  of 
the  Monroe  Ward,  South  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1885,  was  born  Jan. 
17,  1825,  in  Windom,  Luzerne  Co., 
Pennsylvania,  a  son  of  Emer  Harris. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1852,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  in 
July,  1877,  by  Erastus  Snow.  He  died 
June  6,  1885. 

HESSE,  John  Bernhardt,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Monroe  Ward  Bishopric  in 
South  Sevier  Stake  in  1874-1878,  was 
born  May  16,  1828,  at  Grandslev,  Vi- 
borg  amt,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Johan 
B.  Hesse  and  Maren  Christensen.  He 
was  baptized  June  13,  1858,  filled  a 
mission  to  Scandinavia  in  1882-1884, 
and  was  a  High  Priest  at  time  of 
being  set  apart  for  his  mission.  See 
History  of  the  Scandinavian  Mission. 


Vol.  IV,  No.  40 


October  3,  1936 


626 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


JOHNSON,  Wallace,  Bishop  of  the 
Marysvale  Ward,  South  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1921,  was  born 
May  26,  1892,  in  Johnson,  Kane  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Nephi  Johnson  and  Julia 
Shumway.  He  was  baptized  June  30, 
1900,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1911-1913,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  20, 
1920,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

JOLLY,  Bryant  Heber,  jun.,  Bishop 
of  the  Brooklyn  Ward,  South  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1900  to  1904,  was 
born  Oct.  4,  1870,  in  Harmony,  Wash- 
ington Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Bryant 
Heber  Jolly  and  Orissa  Ann  Angelia 
Taylor.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  19, 
1878,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1897-1898  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  23,  1900, 
by  Anthon  H.  Lund. 

LUNDGREN,      Arthur      Christian, 

Bishop  of  the  Monroe  North  Ward, 
South  Sevier  Stake,  Utah,  from  1928 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  May  28,  1895,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Peter 
M.  Lundgren  and  Marie  Christine 
Christensen.  He  was  baptized  May 
28,  1903,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
8,  1925,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  a 
Bishop  May  13,  1928,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

MAGLEBY,  John  Ephraim,  presi- 
dent of  the  South  Sevier  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1921  to  1928,  was  born  Nov.  27, 
1862,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Hans  Olsen  Magieby  and  Gjertrud 
Marie  Christensen  (Roe).  He  was  bap- 
tized July  6,  1871,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Feb.  24,  1885,  by  Wm.  M.  Palmer,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  in 
1885-1889.  On  a  second  mission  to 
New  Zealand,  he  presided  over  the 
New  Zealand  mission  from  1898-1902. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec. 
14,  1902,  by  George  Teasdale,  and  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  South  Sevier 
Stake  Jan.  30,  1921,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 


NICKLE,  Francis  Clement,  Bishop 
of  the  Marysvale  Ward,  South  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1923,  was 
born  April  30,  1875,  in  Fayette  County, 
Illinois.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  1,  1914, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  11,  1920, 
by  John  Christensen,  and  sustained  as 
Bishop  Nov.  13,  1921. 

PARKER,  James  Elbert,  Bishop  of 
the  Joseph  Ward,  South  Sevier  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  .  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  42.) 

SHAW,  James  Ferguson,  Bishop  of 
the  Brooklyn  Ward,  South  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1904  to  1909,  was 
born  Feb.  21,  1848,  in  Garnkirk,  Lan- 
arkshire, Scotland,  a  son  of  Alexander 
Shaw  and  Elizabeth  Ferguson.  He  was 
baptized  in  1858,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  22,  1898,  by  George  Teas- 
dale,  and  a  Bishop  in  1904.  He  died 
May  1,  1932. 

SMITH,  Arthur  Bennion,  Bishop  of 
the  Monroe  South  Ward,  South  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  28,  1893,  in  Manassa, 
Colorado,  a  son  of  Albert  Ricks  Smith 
and  Irene  Ursula  Haskell.  He  was 
baptized  May  4,  1902,  filled  a  mission 
in  the  Northwestern  States  in  1917- 
1920,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 
1,  1926,  by  John  E.  Magieby,  and  a 
Bishop  May  15,  1927,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

STEWART,    William   Anderson, 

Bishop  of  the  Inverury  Ward,  South 
Sevier  Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1879, 
was  born  June  2,  1830,  in  Tuscaloosa 
County,  Alabama,  a  son  of  George  Ste- 
wart and  Ruth  Baker.  He  was  baptized 
in  1847,  ordained  a  High  Priest  July 
16,  1877,  by  Orson  Hyde,  who  also  set 
him  apart  as  Bishop  July  16,  1877. 
He  died  Nov.  29,  1911. 

SYLVESTER,    Joshua    William, 

Bishop  of  the  Elsinore  Ward,  South 
Sevier  Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1887, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


627 


was  born  Feb.  5,  1843,  in  Sheffield, 
England,  a  son  of  James  Sylvester  and 
Rebecca  Nicholson.  He  was  baptized 
in  1851,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  16,  1877,  by  Erastus 
Snow.     He  died  May  31,  1925. 

TAYLOR,  Jared,  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Marysvale  Branch,  South  Sevier 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1890  to  1895,  was 
born  Jan.  26,  1845,  in  Elba,  Genessee 
Co.,  New  York,  a  son  of  Stephen 
Taylor  and  Martha  Turner.  He  was 
baptized  Jan.  2,  1889,  and  sustained  as 
presiding  Elder  June  29, 1890.  He  died 
Aug.  6,  1900. 

UTLEY,  Ray,  Bishop  of  the  Sevier 
Ward,  South  Sevier  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1917  to  1927,  was  born  March  8,  1892, 
in  Annabella,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Gabriel  Marion  Utley  and  Sophia 
Burgess.  He  was  baptized  June  9, 
1900,  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  26,  1911, 
by  Levi  L.  Jackman,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1911-1913, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  23,  1917,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 


Star  Valley  Stake 

BARRUS,  Orrin  Orlando,  Bishop  of 
the  Fairview  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1913  to  1924,  was  born 
May  29,  1870,  in  Grantsville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Benjamin  F.  Barrus  and  Lavina 
Steele.  He  was  baptized  May  29,  1878, 
filled  two  missions,  one  to  Samoa  in 
1893-1897  and  one  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1908-1910,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  1,  1913, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

BRACKEN,  Aaron  Franklin,  Bishop 
of  the  Freedom  Ward,  Star  Valley 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1900  to  1919,  was 
born  Jan.  12,  1868,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Aaron  Bracken  and  Elizabeth 
Lee.  He  was  baptized  in  June,  1876, 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  1896,  by  Chas. 


D.  Cazier,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1896-1897,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
7,  1900,  by  Abraham  O.  Woodruff. 

BUTTERWORTH,  Isaiah,  Bishop  of 
the  Thayne  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1901  to  1905,  was  born 
July  8,  1868,  in  Winwich  parish,  Hunt- 
ingtonshire,  England,  a  son  of  William 
Butterworth  and  Mary  Rose.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1872,  was  baptized 
in  August,  1876,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  Clinton  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
in  1894,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  18,  1901, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith. 

CALL,  Christian  Joseph,  Bishop  of 
the  Afton  South  Ward,  Star  Valley 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1921  to  1926,  was 
born  Dec.  21,  1889,  in  Afton,  a  son  of 
Anson  Vasco  Call  and  Lucy  E.  King. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  16,  1898,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
1915-1917,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  17,  1922,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

CLARK,  Arthur  Raymond,  Bishop 
of  the  Etna  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1919  to  1929,  was  born 
Dec.  3,  1878,  in  Richville,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Arthur  Benjamin  Clark  and  Helen 
Margaret  Ross.  He  was  baptized  in 
April,  1887,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1926-1927  (short 
term),  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  15,  1900,  by  Abraham  O.  Wood- 
ruff, and  a  Bishop  June  22,  1919,  by 
James   E.  Talmage. 

DANA,  Roswell  Roy,  jun.,  Bishop  of 
the  Thayne  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  11,  1889,  in  Willard,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Roswell  R.  Dana  and  Melvina 
Eunice  Davis.  He  was  baptized  July 
3,  1897,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1908-1911,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  23,  1917,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney,  and  a  Bishop  in  December, 
1921,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard.     He  pre- 


628 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


sided  over  the  Bedford  Ward  from  1921 
to  1925  (June  14)  when  he  was  set 
apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Thayne  Ward 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

DEWEY,  John  Cyrus,  jun..  Bishop 
of  the  Fairview  Ward,  Star  Valley 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1889  to  1895,  was 
born  April  12,  1859,  in  Bountiful,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  C.  Dewey  and  Mary 
Allen.  He  was  baptized  May  9,  1869, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
July  2,  1889,  by  Heber  J.  Grant.  He 
died  Oct.  8,  1895. 

GARDNER,  Clarence,  president  of 
the  Star  Valley  Stake,  Wyoming,  from 
1913  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  6,  1875, 
in  West  Jordan,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Archibald  Gardner  and  Mary  (Marie) 
Larsen.  He  was  baptized  July  3,  1884, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  12,  1894, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1898-1900,  and 
was  set  apart  as  president  of  the  Stake 
June   1,  1913,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

GARDNER,  Franklin   Richards, 

Bishop  of  the  Afton  North  Ward,  Star 
Valley  Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1919  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  July  23,  1888,  in 
West  Jordan,  Utah,  a  son  of  Archibald 
Gardner  and  Marie  Larsen.  He  was 
baptized  July  23,  1896,  ordained  an  El- 
der Oct.  30,  1909,  by  Osborne  Low, 
filled  a  mission  to  South  Africa  in 
1910-1912,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  22,  1919,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

GEORGE,  Joseph  Ezra,  Bishop  of 
the  Auburn  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1928  to  1930 -|-,  was  born 
March  12,  1887,  in  Ramah,  New  Mex- 
ico, a  son  of  Henry  George  and  Eliza- 
beth Shelton.  He  was  baptized  May 
4,  1895,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  17,  1928,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

HILLSTEAD,  Robert  Henry,  Bishop 
of   the   Fairview    Ward,    Star    Valley 


Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1924  to  1930,  was 
born  May  15,  1870,  in  Lincolnshire, 
England,  a  son  of  John  B.  Hillstead 
and  Charlotte  Gray.  He  came  to  Utah 
in  1870,  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  30, 
1913,  by  Heber  J.  Grant,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  21,  1924,  by  John  A.  Widtsoe. 

HOKANSON,  Nils,  Bishop  of  the 
Thayne  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1905  to  1913,  was  born 
Jan.  10,  1869,  in  Betekulla,  Sweden, 
a  son  of  Ola  and  Ingar  Hokanson.  He 
was  baptized  in  1877,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  3,  1905, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith.    He  died  March 

28,  1924. 

HOLBROOK,  Joseph  Hyrum,  Bish- 
op of  the  Auburn  Ward,  Star  Valley 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1891  to  1894,  was 
born  Feb.  8,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  Holbrook  and 
Caroline  Angell.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  1,  1889,  and  a  Bishop  Aug. 

29,  1891,  by  William  Budge. 

KENNINGTON,     George     Seward, 

Bishop  of  the  Afton  South  Ward,  Star 
Valley  Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1927  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept.  29,  1879,  in 
Liberty,  Idaho,  a  son  of  William  H. 
Kennington  and  Annie  Seward.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  11,  1887,  ordained 
an  Elder  Jan.  1,  1905,  by  Geo.  Osmond, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southei'n  States 
in  1905-1907,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  22,  1919,  by  John  Wells, 
and  a  Bishop  June  19,  1927,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

MILLER,  George  Campbell,  Bishop 
of  the  Thayne  Ward,  Star  Valley 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1913  to  1925,  was 
born  May  10,  1878,  at  Hot  Springs, 
Box  Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  S. 
Miller  and  Elizabeth  Hodge.  He  was 
baptized  March  23,  1902,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  1,  1913, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


629 


NILSON,  Andrew  Matts,  Bishop  of 
the  Osmond  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1901  to  1915,  was  born 
May  15,  1860,  near  Christianstad, 
Sweden,  a  son  of  Matts  Swenson  and 
Ella  Anderson.  He  was  baptized  May 
5,  1881,  after  coming  to  Utah  in  1879, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  18,  1901,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith. 

PARSONS,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Cottonwood  (Smoot)  Ward,  Star  Val- 
ley Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1889  to  1903, 
was  born  Dec.  4,  1849,  in  Lake  Branch, 
Pottawattamie  Co.,  Iowa,  the  son  of 
William  Parsons  and  Mary  Jenkins. 
He  came  to  Utah  in  1852,  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  settled  in 
Star  Valley  in  1887,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  2,  1889, 
by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

PETERSON,  Charles  Henry,  Bishop 
of  the  Smoot  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1913  to  1929,  was  born 
Sept.  13,  1866,  in  Peterson,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Geo.  H.  Peterson  and  Eliza 
Wilde.  He  was  baptized  in  1874,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  Heber  J. 
Grant,  and  a  Bishop  June  6,  1913,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

PORTER,  Charles  Worthy,  Bishop 
of  the  Fairview  Ward,  Star  Valley 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1895  to  1898,  was 
born  Dec.  17,  1867,  in  Porterville, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Alma  Porter  and 
Minerva  Dewell.  He  was  baptized  in 
1876,  and  oi-dained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Nov.  20,  1895,  by  John  Henry 
Smith. 

ROBINSON,  Carl,  Bishop  of  the 
Freedom  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
May  3,  1895,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  Robinson  and  Hilda  Erick- 
son.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  an  Elder  May  10, 
1914,  by  A.  Carlos  McCoombs,  filled 
a  mission  to  California  in  1914-1916, 


and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  22,  1919,  by  James  E. 
Talmage. 

TAYSOM,  Gilbert,  Bishop  of  the 
Afton  South  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1919  to  1921,  was  born 
May  30,  1891,  in  Afton,  a  son  of 
Abram  J.  Taysom  and  Hannah  Neild. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  1,  1900,  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1914- 
1916,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  in  1917,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney 
and  presided  over  the  Kemmerer 
Ward,  Wyo.,  from  1917  to  1919.  He 
was  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  Afton 
South  Ward  June  22,  1919,  by  James 
E.  Talmage. 

THATCHER,  John  B.,  jun..  Bishop 
of  the  Bedford  Ward,  Star  Valley 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1895  to  1905,  was 
born  May  22,  1859,  in  Payson,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  B.  Thatcher  and  Rachel 
Hannah  Davis.  He  was  baptized  when 
young,  filled  a  mission  to  the  States 
in  1881-1882,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  4,  1895,  by  George  Os- 
mond. Prior  to  1905,  he  presided  over 
the  Bedford  Branch. 

TITTENSOR,  John  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Thayne  Ward,  Star  Valley 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1891  to  1895,  was 
born  March  31,  1866,  at  Richmond, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  Tittensor  and 
Sarah  Robbins.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  26, 1891, 
by  William  Budge. 

TITTENSOR,  Russell  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Bedford  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1928  to  1930 -|-,  was  born 
July  22,  1892,  in  Thayne,  Wyo.,  a  son 
of  Thomas  E.  Tittensor  and  Mary  E. 
Goaslind.  He  was  baptized  July  22, 
1900,  ordained  an  Elder  by  Roswell 
R.  Dana,  jun.,  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia in  1913-1915,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  18,  1922,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard,  who 'also  ordained  him  a 
Bishop  June  17,  1928, 


630 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


WOOD,  Daniel  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
the  Auburn  Ward,  Star  Valley  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1913  to  1928,  was  born 
Oct.  8,  1870,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Daniel  C.  Wood  and  Elizabeth  Wad- 
doups.  He  was  baptized  in  October, 
1878,  ordained  a  High  Priest  July  30, 
1899,  by  Geo.  Osmond,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1911-1913, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Hyrum 
M.  Smith  in  1913. 


Summit  Stake 


ANDRUS,  George  Boyes,  Bishop  of 
the  Marion  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1915  to  1916,  was  born 
May  23,  1881,  in  Big  Cottonwood, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Milo  A.  Andrus,  jun., 
and  Elizabeth  Boyes.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  6,  1889,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Feb.  5,  1911,  and  a  Bishop  Aug. 
1,  1915,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

ASPER,  Ellas,  Bishop  of  the  Echo 
Ward;  Summit  Stake,  Utah,  from  1877 
to  1894,  was  born  March  7,  1820,  in 
York  County,  Penn.,  a  son  of  Geo.  As- 
per  and  Salome  Firestine.  He  came  to 
Utah  in  1861,  and  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  July  9,  1877,  by  Lorenzo  Snow. 
He  died  March  20,  1894. 

ALLEN,  Thomas  Lonsdale,  presi- 
dent of  the  Summit  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1921  to  1925,  was  born  June  2,  1849, 
in  Antrim,  Ireland,  a  son  of  Robert 
B.  Allen  and  Jane  Ferguson.  He  was 
baptized  in  1862,  came  to  Utah  in  1869, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  April  21, 
1901,  and  set  apart  as  first  counselor. 
He  was  set  apart  as  president  Aug. 
6,  1921,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

BEARD,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Coalville  South  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1889  to  1895,  was  born 
Dec.  21,  1855,  in  Whaley  Bridge,  near 
Stockport,  Cheshire,  England,  a  son 
of  Thomas  Beard  and  Ellen  Clai'k.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  of  age. 


emigrated  to  Utah  in  1868,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  18,  1889,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

CHRISTENSEN,  George,  Bishop  of 
the  Kamas  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1916  to  1920,  was  born 
July  4,  1867,  in  Milton,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Lars  Peter  Christensen  and  Annie 
Mary  Peterson.  He  was  sustained  as 
Bishop  June  25,  1916,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  and  set  apart  Aug.  6,  1916,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

CLARK,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Upton 
Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah,  from  1882 
to  1901,  was  born  March  14,  1833,  in 
Lincoln,  England,  a  son  of  Thos.  Clark 
and  Ann  Beck.  He  was  baptized  Jan. 
29,  1849,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1866, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  May, 
1879,  and  a  Bishop  May  14,  1882,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith.     He  died  Jan.  22,  1923. 

CORBITT,  Marion  LeRoy,  Bishop 
of  the  Francis  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1927.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  26.) 

CRITTENDEN,  Irwin,  Bishop  of 
the  Hoytsville  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1930 +  .  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  26.) 

FRAZIER,  Marion,  Bishop  of  the 
Oakley  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1894  to  1900,  was  born  June  20, 
1856,  in  Fort  Supply,  Wyoming,  a  son 
of  Thomas  L.  Frazier  and  Rachel  M. 
Young.  He  was  baptized  in  1867,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  5,  1894,  by  Brigham  Young,  jun. 

GIBBONS,  William  Oliver,  Bishop 
of  the  Rockport  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  6,  1870,  in  Rockport,  a  son  of 
Thos.  Gibbons  and  Sarah  Elizabeth 
Lack.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  2,  1879, 
ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  17,  1895,  by 
Daniel  Lewis,  and  filled  a  mission  to 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


631 


the  Central  States  in  1900-1902.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  22, 
1902,  by  Moses  W.  Taylor,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Sept.  28,  1921,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards, 

GREEN,  Cornelius  S.,  Bishop  of  the 
Marion  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1913  to  1915,  was  born  Nov.  16, 
1860,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Cornelius  Green  and  Karen  C.  Hansen. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  23,  1875,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  in 
the  fall  of  1913. 

HORTIN,  Joseph  Edmond,  Bishop 
of  the  Rockport  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1915  to  1917,  was  born 
Feb.  4,  1871,  in  Rockport,  the  son  of 
John  Hortin  and  Maria  Wilkelson.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  16,  1881,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  30,  1915,  by 
Moses  W.  Taylor  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Jan.  30,  1916,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

JONES.  Charles  Ritchens,  Bishop 
of  the  Coalville  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1921,  was  born 
Feb.  12,  1877,  in  Henefer,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Robert  Jones  and  Mariann 
Ritchins.  He  was  baptized  May  30, 
1885,  ordained  a  High  Priest  June  6, 
1918,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Jan.  26,  1919,  by  the 
same  Apostle. 

JORGENSEN,    Hyrum    Andrew, 

Bishop  of  the  Peoa  Ward,  Summit 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  14,  1874,  in  Peoa,  the 
son  of  Anders  Jorgensen  and  Inger 
Nielsen.  He  was  baptized  June  8, 
1884,  ordained  an  Elder  and  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1917-1918,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  28,  1923,  by  Thomas  L.  Allen,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  July  26,  1925,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

KIDD,  John  Chester,  Bishop  of  the 
Upton  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1910  to  1915,  was  born  Dec.  25, 


1883,  at  Riverton,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  B.  Kidd  and  Annie  Sta- 
Icy.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  15,  1893, 
filled  a  mission  to  Holland  in  1907- 
1910,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Jan.  28,  1911,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant. 

LEWIS,  William  Davis,  Bishop  of 
the  Park  City  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1909  to  1916,  was  born 
Sept.  7,  1858,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  John  Lewis  and  Jane  Da- 
vis. He  was  baptized  Sept.  7,  1866, 
sustained  as  Bishop  of  Vineyard  ward, 
Sharon  Stake,  Utah,  Dec.  24,  1899, 
serving  until  March  1,  1904.  He  was 
set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Park  City 
Ward  Oct.  10,  1909,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 
He  died  April  27,  1922. 

LEWIS,  William  John,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Summit  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930,  was  born 
April  28,  1885,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Wm.  Davis  Lewis  and  Sarah  Ann 
Harding.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1908-1910,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  9,  1917,  by 
Geo.  W.  Young,  and  a  Bishop  Sept. 
22,  1918,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.  He 
presided  over  the  Park  City  Ward  un- 
til 1925,  and  was  set  apart  as  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Summit  Stake  April  19,  1925,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards. 

MARCHANT,  Abraham,  jun.,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Peoa  Branch,  Sum- 
mit Stake,  Utah,  from  1862  to  1877, 
and  Bishop  of  the  Peoa  Ward  from 
1877  to  1881,  was  born  March  17,  1816, 
in  Newton  (Bath),  Somersetshire, 
England,  a  son  of  Abraham  Marchant 
and  Mary  Pranket.  He  was  baptized 
and  labored  as  a  missionary  before 
emigrating  to  Utah  in  1854,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  in  1877.  He  died 
Oct.  5,  1881,  in  Peoa,  Utah. 

MARCHANT,    Abraham     Franklin, 

Bishop    of    the    Peoa    Ward,    Summit 


632 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1923,  was 
born  Sept.  30,  1884,  in  Peoa,  a  son  of 
Albert  Geo.  Henry  Marchant  and  Har- 
riet Mathilda  Casper.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  2,  1893,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Western  States  in  1911-1913,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  27,  1916, 
and  sustained  as  Bishop. 

MAXWELL,  Arthur,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Peoa  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1901  to  1916,  was  born  Dec.  14, 
1857,  in  West  Jordan,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Arthur  Maxwell  and  Elizabeth  Mc- 
Causlin.  He  was  baptized  in  July, 
1869,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1888-1890,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  20, 
1901,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith.  He  died  Feb. 
24,  1931,  at  Peoa,  Utah. 

MAXWELL,  James  A.,  Bishop  of 
the  Peoa  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1923  to  1924,  was  born  July  28, 
1873,  in  Peoa,  a  son  of  Ralph  Maxwell 
and  Isabel  McGavin.  He  was  baptized 
May  27,  1883,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  27,  1916,  by  Geo.  W.  Young,  and 
a  Bishop  Oct.  28,  1923,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman.  Bishop  Maxwell  died  July  14, 
1928. 

MAXWELL,  Ralph  Wallace,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Summit  Stake,  Utah,  from  1921  to 
1924,  was  born  May  11,  1862,  in  Peoa, 
a  son  of  Ralph  Maxwell  and  Isabel 
McGavin.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
6,  1894,  by  Alma  Eldredge,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1904- 
1906,  and  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  stake  presidency  in  June, 
1921,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards.  He  died 
May  23,  1933,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

McNEIL,  Thomas  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Fi'ancis  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1929,  was  born 
Aug.  25,  1885,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Thomas  McNeil  and  Martha 
Ellen  Pi-escott.    He  was  baptized  June 


6,  1897,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  6,  1927,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

MITCHELL,  Daniel  J.,  Bishop  of 
the  Francis  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1899  to  1908,  was  born 
Jan.  18,  1853,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Benjamin  Trotter  Mitchell 
and  Lois  J.  Judd.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Nov. 
11,  1899,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

NELSON,  Joseph  Everet,  Bishop  of 
the  Marion  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1913,  was  born  Aug.  26,  1863, 
in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  E. 
Nelson  and  Sarah  Ann  Richmond.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  19,  1875,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage. 

OBLAD,    Zachariah    James,    Bishop 

of  the  Park  City  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 -h,  was  born 
Oct.  3,  1890,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Johan  Fred  Oblad  and 
Marie  Magdaline  Larsen.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  1,  1898,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  25,  1920,  by  John  Lamb, 
and  a  Bishop  June  26,  1925,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards. 

PACK,  Merrit  Newton,  Bishop  of 
the  Kamas  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1916,  was  born 
May  1,  1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Pack  and  Julia  Ives. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  23,  1886,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  19,  1901, 
by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  and  sustained 
as  Bishop  Jan.  16,  1910. 

PACK,  Ward  E.,  second  counselor 
in  the  Summit  Stake  presidency,  Utah, 
from  1881  to  1901,  was  born  April  17, 
1834,  in  Watertown,  New  York,  a  son 
of  John  Pack  and  Julia  Ives.  He  was 
baptized  April  17,  1842.  He  died  Nov. 
16,  1907. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


633 


PETTIT,  John  Edward,  Bishop  of 
the  Grass  Creek  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1902  to  1908,  was  born 
July  10,  1864,  in  Dunstall  Green,  Suf- 
folk, England,  a  son  of  Edward  Wade 
Pettit  and  Harriet  Pettit.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  27,  1881,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1887,  and  was  sustained 
and  set  apart  as  Bishop  in  1902. 

POWELL,  Wilber  Morgan,  Bishop 
of  the  Upton  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  June  21, 
1901,  in  Coalville,  Utah.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  3,  1910,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  6,  1930,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

RICHARDS,  Ralph  Ashton,  Bishop 
of  the  Oakley  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930  + ,  was  born 
Feb.  28,  1903,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Albert  D.  Richards  and  Emily 
T.  Ashton.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  12, 
1911,  ordained  an  Elder  April  1,  1923, 
by  John  Frandsen,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1923-1925,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  17,  1929,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

RICHARDS,  William  Pierson,  Bish- 
op of  the  Oakley  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1901  to  1912,  was  born 
May  18,  1864,  in  Wanship,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Franklin  D.  Richards  and  Su- 
san S.  Pierson.  He  was  baptized  July 
21,  1877,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  27,  1901,  by  Reed 
Smoot. 

RICHINS,  Edward,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Echo  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1894  to  1900,  was  born 
April  25,  1835,  in  Sheepscomb,  Glou- 
cestershire, England,  a  son  of  Rich- 
ard Richins  and  Prescilla  Wager.  He 
joined  the  Church  in  1852,  came  to 
Utah  in  1855,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1889-1890,  and  became  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Echo  Branch  in 
1894.     He  died  Nov.  15,  1915. 


RICHINS,  Moroni,  Bishop  of  the 
Echo  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  April 
3,  1873,  in  Echo,  a  son  of  Edward  Rich- 
ins  and  Sarah  Beard.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  3,  1881,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  in  1902-1904,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  2, 
1907,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith.  He  was 
chosen  as  Bishop  Feb.  5,  1928, 

ROBERTSON,  Ezra  Finch,  Bishop 
of  the  Wanship  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  29,  1886,  in  Lake  Shore,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Ezra  W.  Robertson  and  Re- 
becca Ann  Finch.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  2,  1894,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  5,  1921,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

SALMON,  John  Faddis,  Bishop  of 
the  Grass  Creek  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1901  to  1902,  was  born 
Sept.  12,  1871,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Robert  Salmon  and  Agnes 
Scott.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  12,  1880, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op June  23,  1901,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

SALMON,  Sumner  Robert,  Bishop 
of  the  Coalville  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  9,  1899,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  H.  Salmon  and  Sarah 
Elizabeth  Fisher.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1920-1923, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  July  25,  1925,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

SARGENT,  Lorenzo,  Bishop  of  the 
Kamas  Wax'd,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1928,  was  born  July  6, 
1883,  in  Hoytsville,  Utah,  the  son  of 
William  Sargent  and  Sarah  Elizabeth 
Spriggs.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  15, 
1891,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1909-1911,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1921  by  John  A.  Widtsoe, 
and  a  Bishop  April  6,  1924,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 


634 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


SARGENT,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Hoytsville  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1886  to  1910,  was  boi-n  Aug.  1, 
1844,  in  Dowsdale,  Lincolnshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  John  Sargent  and 
Hannah  Farrow.  He  was  baptized 
May  21,  1868,  came  to  Utah  in  1868, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  15, 
1886,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

SAWLEY,  Edward,  Bishop  of  the 
East  Coalville  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1909,  was  born 
March  12,  1854,  in  Burnley,  Lanca- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  William  Saw- 
ley  and  Margaret  Hartley.  He  was 
baptized  in  1885,  came  to  Utah  in  1887, 
and  was  ox-dained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  27,  1908,  by  Geo.  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

SAXTON,  John  Solomon,  Bishop  of 
the  Upton  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1901  to  1910,  was  born  March  7, 
1860,  in  Henry  County,  HI.,  a  son  of 
Solomon  Saxton  and  Matilda  Dexter. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  2,  1870,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 
23,  1901,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

SAXTON,  William  Sherwood,  Bish- 
op of  the  Upton  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1920  to  1930,  was  born 
Feb.  8,  1865,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Solomon  Saxton  and  Matilda  Dex- 
ter. He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  in  April, 
1920,   by   Jos.    F.    Smith,   jun. 

SEYMOUR,  John  Heber,  Bishop  of 
the  Oakley  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1929,  was  born 
Jan.  1,  1868,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Charles  Wm.  Seymour  and 
Elizabeth  Brown.  He  was  baptized 
when  nine  years  old,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1894-1897,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1901,  and  a 
Bishop  Aug.  4,  1912,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

SHEPHERD,  Vincent,  Bishop  of  the 
Kamas   Ward,    Summit   Stake,   Utah, 


from  1920  to  1924,  was  born  Oct.  20, 
1866,  in  Radcliff,  Northumberland, 
England,  a  son  of  Geo.  Carr  Shepherd 
and  Mary  Wood.  He  was  baptized 
April  23,  1909,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1915-1917,  and  was 
chosen  as  Bishop  in  1920. 

SIDDOWAY,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the 
Rockport  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1917  to  1921,  was  born  Dec.  25, 
1853,  in  Sunderland,  England,  a  son 
of  Robert  Siddoway  and  Elizabeth 
Dawson.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  8,  1917,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney.  He 
died  July  25,  1921. 

STAPLES,  John  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Cluff  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1912  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March 
26,  1880,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  the  son 
of  James  Brigham  Staples  and  Sarah 
Ellen  Ray.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  3, 
1888,  ordained  an  Elder  April  2,  1905, 
by  Wm.  G.  Johnston,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1905-1907, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May 
2,  1909,  by  David  0.  McKay,  and  a 
Bishop  Nov.  3,  1912,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 

STEPHENS,  Parley  Robert,  Bishop 
of  the  Henefer  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  26, 
1898,  in  Henefer,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam Thomas  Stephens  and  Hannah 
Edith  Richins.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
26,  1906,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  6,  1930,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

TERRY,  William  Zimmerman,  Bish- 
op of  the  Coalville  Ward,  Summit 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1909  to  1912,  was 
born  March  28,  1872,  in  Lewiston, 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  A.  Terry  and 
Susan  Zimmerman.  He  was  baptized 
March  28,  1880,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Aug.  15,  1896,  by  Chas.  W.  Penrose 
and  filled  a  mission  to  Switzerland 
and  Germany  in  1896-1898.  He  was 
sustained  as  a  Bishop  Feb.  7,  1909, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


635 


Bishop    Feb.    24,    1909,   by    Heber   J. 
Grant. 

WADDOUPS,  Ezra,  Bishop  of  the 
Park  City  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1916  to  1918,  was  born  Jan.  24, 
1882,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Thos.  Waddoups  and  Mary  Call.  He 
was  baptized  Jan.  24,  1890,  sustained 
as  Bishop  Aug.  13,  1916,  and  set  apart 
Sept.  13,  1916,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

WICKEL,  Richard,  jun..  Bishop  of 
the  Echo  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1907  to  1922,  was  born  Sept.  21, 
1861,  in  St.  Louis,  Missouri,  a  son  of 
Richard  Wickel  and  Louisa  Weaver. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  24,  1875,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  2,  1907,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

WILDE,  John  Fredrick,  Bishop  of 
the  Cluff  Ward,  Summit  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1901  to  1906,  was  born  May  16, 
1853,  in  Bishopstoke,  Hampshire, 
England,  a  son  of  Henry  Wilde  and 
Jane  Batchelor.  He  came  to  Utah  in 
1859,  was  baptized  Nov.  8,  1863,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  26,  1901,  by  Reed  Smoot.  He  died 
Dec.  21,  1936. 

WILDE,  W  illard  Heber,  second 
counselor  in  the  Summit  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1925  to  1930,  and 
first  counselor  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  13,  1888,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Fredrick  Wilde  and  Jemima 
Clai-k.  He  was  baptized  July  31,  1898, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  January, 
1919,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bish- 
op May  8,  1921.  He  presided  over  the 
Coalville  Ward  until  July  12,  1925,  and 
was  set  apart  April  19,  1925,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards,  as  second  counselor  in 
the  Stake  presidency. 

WILDE,  William  S.,  Bishop  of  the 
Grass  Creek  Ward,  Summit  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1909,  was  born 
Feb.  9,  1864,  in  Coalville,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Henry  Wilde  and  Jane  Batchelor. 


He  was  baptized  July  5,  1873,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  March  19,  1908,  by 
John  Henry  Smith. 

WINTERTON,     Harold     Vernon, 

Bishop  of  the  Woodland  Ward,  Sum- 
mit Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  16,  1903,  in  Charleston,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Hyrum  S.  Winterton  and 
Sarah  Van  Wagoner.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  16,  1911,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  6,  1930, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

YOUNG     (JONGE),     Hans     Olaus, 

Bishop  of  the  Parley's  Park  Ward, 
Summit  Stake,  Utah,  from  1898  to 
1901,  was  born  Oct.  21,  1838,  in  Fred- 
erikstad,  Norway,  the  son  of  Hans  01- 
sen  Jonge  and  Anna  A.  Sandberg.  He 
was  baptized  April  24,  1857,  came  to 
Utah  that  same  year,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  8,  1898, 
by  John  Henry  Smith,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Scandinavia  in  1900-1901.  He 
died  March  23,  1919. 


Taylor  Stake 


ALLEN,  Heber  Franklin,  Bishop  of 
the  Raymond  1st  Ward,  Taylor  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  March  17,  1894,  in  Cardston,  Al- 
berta, Canada,  a  son  of  Heber  C.  Al- 
len and  Amy  L.  Leonard.  He  was 
baptized  March  17,  1902,  ordained  an 
Elder  Sept.  27,  1914,  by  William  Redd, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern  States 
in  1914-1917,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  2,  1925,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  24,  1926,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

ALLEN,  Heber  Simeon,  president 
of  the  Taylor  Stake,  Alberta,  Canada, 
from  1903  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec. 
26,  1864,  in  Hyrum,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Simeon  F.  Allen  and  Bolette  Marie 
Johnson.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  30, 
1873,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  7, 
1902,  by  John  W.  Taylor,  and  set  apart 


636 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


to  preside  over  the  Alberta  Stake.  He 
held  this  position  until  Aug.  31,  1903, 
when  the  stake  was  divided  and  the 
eastern  part  organized  as  the  Taylor 
Stake,  with  him  as  president. 

ALLRED,  John  Gurnett,  Bishop  of 
the  Raymond  1st  Ward,  Taylor  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1915  to  1919,  was  born 
Sept.  11,  1876,  in  Lehi,  Utah,  a  son 
of  James  H.  Allred  and  Kate  Jones. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  2,  1884,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  3,  1915,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith. 

ELLISON,  James  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Raymond  1st  Ward,  Taylor  Stake, 
Canada,  from  Feb.  14  to  May  2,  1915, 
was  born  Sept,  9,  1873,  in  Kaysville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Ephraim  P.  Ellison 
and  Elizabeth  Whitesides.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  5,   1883. 

FAWNS,  Arthur  Eugene,  Bishop 
of  the  Stirling  Wai'd,  Taylor  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1904  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  27,  1875,  in  Payson,  Utah,  a 
son  of  David  Fowler  Fawns  and  Han- 
nah Olson.  He  was  baptized  March  6, 
1884,  filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1899-1901,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  1,  1903,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  and 
a  Bishop  Nov.  13,  1904,  by  John  W. 
Taylor. 

GRANT,  Franklin  Davis,  Bishop  of 
the  Stirling  Ward,  Taylor  Stake,  Can- 
ada, from  1902  to  1904,  was  born  Sept. 
18,  1859,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Geoi'ge  D.  Grant  and  Susan 
Fairchild.  He  was  baptized  May  12, 
1868,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  11, 
1897,  by  Lorenzo  Snow,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  12,  1902,  by  John  W.  Taylor. 

PETERSON,  John  Christian,  Bish- 
op of  the  Welling  Ward,  Taylor  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1908  to  1924,  was  born 
Jan.  28,  1874,  in  Huntsville,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Christian  Peterson  and  Emma 
Backman.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  and  ordained  a  High 


Priest  and  Bishop  May  18,  1908,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

RIRIE,  James  Alfred,  Bishop  of  the 
Magrath  2nd  Ward,  Taylor  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1922  to  1930,  was  born 
Jan.  21,  1885,  in  West  Weber,  Utah, 
the  son  of  James  B.  Ririe  and  Eliza- 
beth Morgan.  He  was  baptized  July 
7,  1892,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Neth- 
erlands in  1904-1907,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  15, 
1922,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

WALKER,  James  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Raymond  2nd  Ward,  Taylor  Stake, 
Canada,  from  1924  to  1930 -f-,  was 
born  May  31,  1885,  in  Coalville,  Utah, 
the  son  of  Robert  Walker  and  Jane 
Wright.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  an  Elder,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Netherlands  in  1907- 
1910  (acting  as  mission  president  in 
1909.)  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  16,  1912,  by  David  0.  McKay, 
and  a  Bishop  May  4,  1924,  by  Stephen 
L.   Richards. 

WILDE,  Abraham  Marsh,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Welling  Branch,  Taylor 
Stake,  Canada,  from  1903  to  1908, 
was  born  May  13,  1857,  in  Bedford 
Leigh,  Lancashire,  England,  the  son 
of  Isaac  Wilde  and  Elizabeth  Marsh. 
He  was  baptized  July  20,  1865,  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1876,  and  was  set 
apart  as  presiding  Elder  of  the  Well- 
ing Branch  Feb.  18,  1903,  by  Heber  S. 
Allen. 

WILDE,  Stirling  Floyd,  Bishop  of 
the  Welling  Ward,  Taylor  Stake,  Can- 
ada, from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  30,  1887,  in  Provo,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Abraham  M.  Wilde  and  Louisa 
Chittenden.  He  was  baptized  July  14, 
1895,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Aug.  20,  1929,  by  Geo.  Albert 
Smith. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


637 


Teton  Stake 

BROWER,  Joshua  Albert,  Bishop 
of  the  Victor  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1920  to  1925,  was  born  Feb. 
1,  1885,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Joshua  Brower  and  Amelia  Allen.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Feb.  19,  1921,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

BUTLER,  Albert  Nathan,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Jackson  Branch,  Teton 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  boi-n  Dec.  6,  1901,  in  Spring  Lake, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  David  Butler 
and  Zina  Menlove.  He  was  baptized 
May  5,  1910,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  in  1925-1927,  and 
was  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder  Nov. 
10,  1929,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

BURGNER,  John  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Darby  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1926  to  1927,  was  born  Jan.  3,  1879, 
in  Midway,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Burg- 
ner  and  Mary  Murr.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  19,  1888,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  22,  1921,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun.  He  died  Jan.  15,  1927,  at  Idaho 
Falls,  Idaho. 

BUXTON,  John  M.,  Bishop  of  the 
Cache  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  25, 1900, 
in  Smithfield,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Buxton  and  Tacy  Harper.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  31,  1908,  ordained  an 
Elder  in  November,  1920,  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Central  States  in 
1920-1923.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  24,  1925,  by  Orson  F.  Whit- 
ney, and  a  Bishop  May  11,  1929,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

CHOULES,  Albert,  president  of  the 
Teton  Stake  of  Zion,  Idaho,  from  1921 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  29,  1877,  in 
Wilton,  Wiltshire,  England,  a  son  of 
George  Choules  and  MaryJane  Pearce. 
He  came  to  Utah  in  1882,  was  bap- 
tized  May   19,   1887,  ordained  a  Sev- 


enty Feb.  27,  1903,  by  Seymour  B. 
Young,  filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1903-1905,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  18,  1919,  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay. He  was  set  apart  as  stake  pres- 
ident Feb.  20,  1921,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

CHRISTOFFERSEN,  John,  Bishop 
of  the  Cache  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1919  to  1925,  was  born  Nov. 

4,  1884,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  C.  Christoffersen  and  Mette 
Marie  Madsen.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
1,  1892,  ordained  a  High  Priest  by 
Dan  C.  Driggs,  and  a  Bishop  May  19, 
1919,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

CORDON,  Ralph  Roland,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Teton  Stake  presidency, 
Idaho,  from  1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  23,  1866,  in  Willard,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Alfred  Cordon  and  Mary  Ann  Voss. 
He  was  baptized  in  1874,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1909- 
1911,  and  was  set  apart  May  17,  1919, 
as  first  counselor  in  the  presidency 
of  the  Teton  Stake  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay. He  died  July  29,  1936,  at  Driggs, 
Idaho. 

CORDON,    Voss    Christian,    Bishop 

of  the  Chapin  Ward,  Teton  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  9,  1894,  in  Treasureton,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  Ralph  R.  Cordon  and  Annie 

5.  Shumway.  He  was  baptized  April 
9,  1902,  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Feb.  6,  1926,  by  David  0.  Mc- 
Kay, and  filled  a  mission  to  California 
in  1928-1930. 

CR  AN  BALL,  Harvey  Leslie,  Bish- 
op of  the  Driggs  Ward,  Teton  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1907  to  1910,  was  born 
Jan.  19,  1874,  in  Springville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Hyrum  Oscar  Crandall  and 
Margaret  Elizabeth  Guyman.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  11,  1907,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

CRANDALL,  Hyrum  Oscar,  Bishop 
of    the    Driggs    Ward,    Teton    Stake, 


638 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Idaho,  from  1901  to  1904,  was  born 
April  26,  1844,  in  LaHarpe,  Hancock 
Co.,  Illinois.  He  was  chosen  Bishop 
of  the  Driggs  Ward  Sept.  23,  1901. 
He  died  April  29,  1904. 

CURTIS,  Nahum  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Victor  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1901  to  1913,  was  born  June  30, 
1863,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Foster  Curtis  and  Clarissa  Bemas. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  13,  1872,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  31,  1893,  by 
Wm.  F.  Rigby,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  2, 
1901,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

DELONEY,  Hyrum  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  Jackson  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1914  to  1915,  was  born  May 
12,  1887,  in  Evanston,  Wyoming,  the 
son  of  Charles  DeLoney  and  Clara 
Jane  Burton.  He  was  sustained  as 
Bishop  Aug.  22,  1914,  when  the  Jack- 
son Branch  was  organized  as  a  Ward. 

DURTSCHI,  Alfred,  Bishop  of  the 
Pratt  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  2,  1886,  in  Wimmis,  Canton  Bern, 
Switzerland,  the  son  of  Edward  Durt- 
schi  and  Rosina  Katherina  Hiltbrand. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  20,  1905,  came 
to  Utah  Oct.  17,  1905,  moved  to  Idaho 
in  1909,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  17,  1918,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards, 
and  a  Bishop  May  9,  1926,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

EDDINGTON,  Elijah,  Bishop  of  the 
Chapin  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1907  to  1908,  a  son  of  William 
Eddington  and  Mary  Littlefield,  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  12,  1907,  by 
Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

EDLEFSEN,  Edlef  B.,  Bishop  of 
the  Driggs  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1910  to  1912,  was  born  April  21, 
1860,  in  Emmelev,  Denmark,  a  son 
of  Niels  Christian  Edlefsen  and  Maren 
Hansen.      He    was    baptized    in    1868, 


ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  9,  1895, 
by  John  Henry  Smith  and  sustained 
as  Bishop  July  17,  1910. 

EGBERT,  Hyrum  S.,  Bishop  of  the 
Tetonia  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1907  to  1915,  was  born  Dec.  30, 
1860,  in  West  Jordan,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Samuel  Egbert  and  Margaret  M. 
Beckstead.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  29, 
1871,  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  May, 
1901,  by  Abraham  O.  Woodruff,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  11,  1907,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

FAIRBANKS,  Joseph  Roy,  Bishop 

of  the  Driggs  Ward,  Teton  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1913  to  1915,  was  born 
April  16,  1876,  in  Glenwood,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Cornelius  M.  Fairbanks  and 
Emily  A.  Davis.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Oct.  7,  1897,  by  B.  H.  Roberts, 
filled  a  mission  to  Colorado  in  1897- 
1900,  and  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
Nov.   16,  1913. 

FAIRBANKS,    Stanley    Brooks, 

Bishop  of  the  Driggs  Ward,  Teton 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1904  to  1907,  was 
born  July  11,  1871,  in  Panguitch,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Cornelius  M.  Fairbanks  and 
Emily  A.  Davis.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  8,  1901,  by  Anthon 
H.  Lund,  and  a  Bishop  May  22,  1904. 

FULLMER,  Halsey  Dean,  Bishop 
of  the  Clawson  Ward,  Teton  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1905  to  1913,  was  born 
June  15,  1865,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Almon  Linnes  Fullmer  and 
Sarah  Ann  Follett.  He  was  baptized 
in  1890,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept. 
2,  1901,  by  John  Henry  Smith,  and 
sustained  as  Bishop  Jan.  29,  1905. 

GEE,  Edgar  Lafayette,  Bishop  of 
the  Palisade  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1921  to  1925,  was  born  Dec. 
28,  1877,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  the  son  of 
Erastus  R.  Gee  and  Geneva  E.  Tel- 
ford. He  was  baptized  in  1895,  or- 
dained  a   High  Priest  June  22,   1919, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


639 


by  Ralph  R.  Cordon,  and  a  Bishop 
May  22,  1921,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HAMILTON,    Alexander    Parley, 

Bishop  of  the  Darby  Ward,  Teton 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1908  to  1909,  was 
born  Jan.  13,  1873,  in  Mill  Creek, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Hamilton  and  Isa- 
bella Wood  Hill.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  8,  1881,  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia in  1896-1899,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  9,  1908, 
by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

HANSON,  Alma,  second  counselor 
in  the  Teton  Stake  presidency,  Idaho, 
from  1921  to  1930 -j-,  was  born  Aug. 
20,  1872,  at  Brigham  City,  Utah.  He 
was  baptized  April  3,  1881,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  12,  1908,  by  Geo. 
Albert  Smith.  He  presided  over  the 
Bates  Ward  from  1908  to  1919,  and 
was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  Feb. 
20,   1921,  by  Melvin  J.   Ballard. 

HANSEN,  Niels  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Cache  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1916  to  1917,  was  born  May  13,  1867, 
in  Merlose,  Holbak  amt,  Denmark.  He 
was  baptized  July  1,  1875,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  6,  1909,  by  Don  C. 
Driggs,  and  a  Bishop  May  21,  1916,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

HARRIS,  Clarence  Earl,  Bishop  of 
the  Tetonia  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1927,  was  born  May  24, 
1879,  in  Parowan,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  Harris  and  Louisa  Hall.  He 
was  baptized  in  November,  1888,  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1913- 
1916,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
27,  1916,  by  James  E.  Talmage,  and 
a  Bishop  in  1919. 

HOMER,  Willard  Greene,  Bishop  of 
the  Tetonia  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1902  to  1907,  and  Bishop  of  the 
Darby  Ward  from  1909  to  1911,  was 
born  Dec.  30,  1873,  in  Smithfield, 
Utah,  a   son   of   Edmund   Homer  and 


Malissa  Greene.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  10,  1893,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  2,  1902,  by 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 

JENSEN,  John  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Driggs  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1927  to  1929,  was  born  Nov.  1, 
1891,  in  Goshen,  Utah,  a  son  of  Niels 
H.  Jensen  and  Marie  Halvorsen.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  7,  1899,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  17,  1924,  by  James 
E.  Talmage,  and  a  Bishop  Nov,  13, 
1927,    by    Geo.    Albert    Smith, 

JOHNSON,  E  p  h  r  a  i  m,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Wilson  Branch,  Teton 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1921  to  1930 -f-, 
was  born  March  20,  1876,  in  Eden, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Peter  Johnson  and  Ann 
M.  Madison.  He  was  baptized  June 
5,  1884,  and  sustained  as  presiding 
Elder  of  Wilson  Branch  July  10,  1921. 

JOHNSON,  Joseph  Alonzo,  Bishop 
of  the  Victor  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1913  to  1916,  was  born  April 
25,  1874,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Joseph  Johnson  and  Ruth  A.  Allis- 
ton.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Nov.  16,  1913,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

KEARSLEY,  Edwin  Nephi,  Bishop 
of  the  Victor  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  30,  1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Edwin  S.  Kearsley  and 
Harriet  Cooper.  He  was  baptized  in 
1880,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  18, 
1923,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  who  also 
ordained  him  a  Bishop  May  11,  1929. 

KILLPACK,  William  Leslie,  Bishop 
of  the  Driggs  Ward,  Teton  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  26,  1886,  in  Molen,  Utah,  a  son 
of  John  David  Killpack  and  Helen 
Elizabeth  Peacock.  He  was  baptized 
June  7,  1894,  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1911-1913,  and  was  ordained 


640 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


a  Bishop  Nov.  9,  1929,  by  Melvin  J. 
Ballard. 

KUNZ,  Milford  Nephi,  Bishop  of 
the  Cedion  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from   1922   to   1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan. 

20,  1890,  in  Bern,  Idaho,  a  son  of 
Samuel  Kunz,  sen.,  and  Louise  Karlen. 
He  was  baptized  in  April,  1898,  or- 
dained an  Elder  Nov.  10,  1910,  by 
David  0.  McKay,  filled  a  mission  to 
Switzerland  in  1910-1913,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  16,  1913, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  was  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Cedron  Branch  from  1919 
to  1922,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  18,  1922,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

LARSEN,  Alfred  Levon,  Bishop  of 
the  Darby  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov. 

21,  1899,  in  Gunnison,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Chas.  A.  Larsen  and  Annie  Peter- 
son. He  was  baptized  Oct.  3,  1908, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1920-1922,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  May  1,  1927,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith,  jun. 

LARSEN,  Charles  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Darby  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1911  to  1913  and  from  1924  to  1926, 
was  born  Aug.  16,  1868,  in  Lendum, 
Hjorring  amt,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Jens 
Larsen  and  Dorthea  Andersen.  He 
was  baptized  Jan.  17,  1886,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  6,  1902,  by  J.  D. 
Killpack,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May 
21,  1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

LITTLE,  Edwin  Sobieski,  Bishop  of 
the  Clawson  (Leigh)  Ward,  Teton 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1895  to  1898,  was 
born  Nov.  5,  1860,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  George  E.  Little  and 
Martha  Taylor.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  moved  to  Teton  Val- 
ley in  1889,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  9,  1895,  by 
John  Henry  Smith. 

LOVELAND,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Darby    Ward,    Teton    Stake,    Idaho, 


from  1905  to  1908,  was  born  Aug.  15, 
1861,  in  Call's  Fort,  Box  Elder  Co., 
Utah.  He  was  baptized  in  1872,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  20,  1905,  by  Orrin  P.  Miller. 

MAY,  James  Ira,  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Jackson  Branch,  Teton  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1905  to  1914,  was 
born  Nov.  29,  1857,  in  Bountiful,  Utah, 
a  son  of  James  May  and  Martha  Allen. 
He  was  baptized  March  1,  1866,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1891-1893,  and  two  missions  to  Great 
Britain  in  1914  and  in  1921-1922.  In 
1914  conditions  at  home  necessitated 
an  early  release.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  at  Driggs  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  a  Bishop  by  Hyrum  M. 
Smith.  In  1926  he  filled  a  short  term 
mission  to  California. 

MEIKLE,  Robert  Gilbert,  Bishop  of 
the  Clawson  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1898  to  1903,  was  born  June  5, 
1868,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  a  son  of 
James  Meikle  and  Harriet  L.  Peacock. 
He  filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  in 
1890-1894,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  3,  1898,  by  John  Henry  Smith.' 

MICKELSEN,  Canute  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Cache  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1925  to  1929,  was  born  Nov.  10, 
1875,  in  Denmark.  He  was  baptized 
April  1,  1899,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Wm.  H.  Mendenhall,  and  a  Bishop 
Oct.  25,  1925,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

MORGAN,  Frederick  Willard,  Bish- 
op of  the  Pratt  Ward,  Teton  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1897  to  1908,  was  born 
Aug.  12,  1863,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  son 
of  Joseph  R.  Morgan  and  Mary  J. 
Turner.  He  was  baptized  when  nine 
years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1890-1892,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  12,  1896,  and  a 
Bishop  Aug.  14,  1897,  by  John  Henry 
Smith. 

MOULTON,  Thomas  Alma,  presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Grovont  Branch,  Te- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


641 


ton  Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1921  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  10,  1883,  in  Heber  City, 
Utah,  the  son  of  Charles  A.  Moulton 
and  Rhoda  Francia  Duke.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  16,  1891,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1905-1907, 
and  was  set  apart  Aug.  21,  1921,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards  to  preside  over  the 
Grovont  Branch. 

NEELEY,  Enos  Austin,  Bishop  of 
the  Palisade  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  May 
19,  1873,  in  Bear  River  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  Neeley  and  Mary  C. 
Nelson.  He  was  baptized  May  19, 
1881,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1897-1900,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  16,  1916,  by  George 
S.  Young,  and  a  Bishop  June  14,  1925. 

NELSON,  David  Anthony,  Bishop  of 
the  Chapin  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1909  to  1915,  was  born  Dec.  19, 
1862,  in  Goshen,  Utah,  a  son  of  Chris- 
tian Nielsen  and  Ann  Josephine  Evans. 
He  was  baptized  June  7,  1871,  ordained 
a  Seventy  Nov.  11,  1895,  by  John 
Henry  Smith,  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  Australasia  in  1895,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
16,  1909,  by  Don  C.  Driggs. 

NELSON,  Gamaliel  V.,  Bishop  of 
the  Driggs  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1925  to  1927,  was  born  Dec.  8, 
1871,  at  Oxford,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Wm. 
G.  Nelson  and  Elvira  Vail.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  5,  1880,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  4,  1896,  by  Mathias  F. 
Cowley,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  24,  1925,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney.  He  died  Oct.  12, 
1928,  at  Driggs,  Idaho. 

NIELSEN,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Cache  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1917  to  1919,  was  born  Dec.  9,  1870, 
in  Weston,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Thomas  L. 
Nielsen  and  Andrea  Jensen.  He  was 
baptized  Dec.  9,  1878,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty  July   22,   1891,   by   Seymour   B. 


Young  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1897-1899.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1902  by 
Abi'aham  Owen  Woodruff,  and  a  Bish- 
op May  1,  1917,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

PRATT,  Mathoni  Wood,  Bishop  of 
the  Pratt  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1889  to  1897,  was  born  July  6, 
1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Parley  P.  Pratt  and  Mary  Wood.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  5,  1864,  and  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  22, 
1889,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

RAMMELL,  Parley  Samuel,  Bishop 
of  the  Tetonia  Ward,  Teton  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1916  to  1918,  was  born 
Dec.  4,  1884,  in  Providence,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Charles  H.  Rammell  and  Caro- 
line Berger.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  4, 
1892,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  29, 
1912,  by  John  Leatham,  and  a  Bishop 
May  21,  1916,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

RAWLINGS,  Walter,  jun.,  Bishop 
of  the  Tetonia  Ward,  Teton  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1918  to  1919,  was  born 
Dec.  19,  1891,  at  Fairview,  Idaho,  the 
son  of  Walter  Rawlings  and  Lottie 
Inglet.  He  was  baptized  July  6,  1901, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1911-1913,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  16,  1916,  by  James  F. 
Griggs,  and  a  Bishop  March  6,  1918, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

RIGBY,  James,  Bishop  of  the  Pratt 
Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1918 
to  1926,  was  born  Aug.  25,  1881,  at 
Newton,  Utah,  the  son  of  William  F. 
Rigby  and  Sophia  Eckersley.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  25,  1889,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  18,  1913,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  17, 1918, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

ROBERTSON,  James  M.,  jun.,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  South  Park  Branch, 
Teton  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1926  to 
1930 +  ,   was   born  Aug.   18,   1894,  in 


Vol.  IV,  No.  41 


October  10.  1936 


642 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Park  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  M. 
Robertson  and  Rebecca  A.  Wilson.  He 
was  baptized  in  August,  1905,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Central  States  in  1915- 
1917,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  24,  1925,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

SINCLAIR,  David  Raymond,  Bishop 
of  the  Victor  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1893  to  1901,  was  born  Sept. 
20,  1861,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Peter  Sinclair  and  Catherine 
Cook.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  24,  1893. 

SMITH,  Octavius,  Bishop  of  the 
Darby  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1921  to  1924,  was  born  Jan.  23,  1878, 
in  Hyrum,  Utah.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  4,  1887,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  19,  1916,  by  James  F.  Griggs, 
and  a  Bishop  May  21,  1921,  by  Jos.  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

STEPHENS,  Clarence  Lee,  Bishop 
of  the  Victor  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1925  to  1928,  was  born  Dec. 
2,  1887,  at  Menan,  Idaho,  a  son  of 
William  N.  Stephens  and  Susan  Ells- 
worth. He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Feb.  7,  1926,  by  David  0.  McKay. 


WESTERBERG,  Edgar  Olaf,  Bish- 
op of  the  Tetonia  Ward,  Teton  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1927  to  1928,  was  born 
Jan.  23,  1902,  at  Rexburg,  Idaho,  a 
son  of  August  Westerberg  and  Eleo- 
nore  S.  Johnson.  He  was  baptized 
April  30,  1910,  filled  a  mission  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1926-1927,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  12, 1928, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

WINEGAR,  Willis  Leroy,  Bishop  of 

the  Jackson  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Wyo., 
from  1915  to  1921  and  acting  presiding 
Elder  from  1924  to  1926,  was  born  Oct. 
19,  1869,  in  Parley's  Canyon,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Stephen  Winegar  and  Lois 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  19,  1879, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  14,  1915,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 
While  acting  as  presiding  Elder,  he 
served  without  counselors. 

WOOD,  Walter  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Bates  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho,  from 
1922  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  27, 
1882,  in  Elba,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Samuel 
Leigh  Wood  and  Mary  Ann  Cockerill. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1890,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  March  10,  1918, 
by  Don  C.  Driggs,  and  a  Bishop  Aug. 
18,  1922,  by  John  A.  Widtsoe. 


STOTT,  James  Willie,  presiding  El- 
der from  1911  to  1915  and  Bishop  of 
the  Palisade  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1915  to  1921,  was  born  Nov.  4, 
1885,  at  Meadow,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam H.  Stott  and  Hannah  Nield.  He 
was  baptized  in  December,  1894,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  16,  1915,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

WARDLE,  Charles  Meyers,  Bishop 
of  the  Bates  Ward,  Teton  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1922,  was  born  Dec.  18, 
1870,  at  South  Jordan,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Isaac  John  Wardle  and  Sophia  Meyers. 
He  was  baptized  May  17,  1879,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  18,  1919,  by 
David  0.  McKay. 


Timpanogos  Stake 

ADAMS,  Burton  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Pleasant  Grove  2nd  Ward,  Tim- 
panogos Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  May  27,  1889,  at 
Fountain  Green,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam Henry  Adams  and  Melissa  Jane 
Caldwell.  He  was  baptized  July  4, 
1897,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Oct.  21,  1928,  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay. 

ATWOOD,  Frank  Dan,  Bishop  of 
the  Pleasant  Grove  3rd  Ward,  Tim- 
panogos Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930+ ,  was  born  June  12,  1882,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Millen 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


643 


Dan  Atwood  and  Sarah  Wanlass.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1891,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July 

7,  1929,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

ATWOOD,  Lawrence  Miner,  Bishop 
of  the  Manila  Ward,  Timpanogos 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  March  4,  1886,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Millen  Dan  Atwood 
and  Sarah  Wanlass.  He  was  baptized 
June  24,  1894,  ordained  an  Elder  Sept. 

8,  1907,  by  Charles  P.  Warnick,  filled 
a  mission  to  Australia  in  1909-1911, 
and  also  three  home  missions  in  the 
Alpine  Stake,  each  of  18  months'  dura- 
tion. He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  19,  1924,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun., 
and  a  Bishop  Oct.  21,  1928,  by  David 
0.  McKay. 

COBBLEY,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Pleasant  Grove  2nd  Ward  (later  the 
Lindon  Ward),  Timpanogos  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1890  to  1904,  was  born 
Sept.  21,  1847,  at  Windwick,  Hunting- 
tonshire,  England,  a  son  of  Thomas 
Cobbley  and  Sarah  Smith.  He  was 
baptized  in  1864,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  20,  1890,  by 
Abraham  H.  Cannon.  He  died  April 
8,  1917. 

CULLIMORE,    Albert    Lorenzo, 

Bishop  of  the  Lindon  Ward,  Timpan- 
ogos Stake,  Utah,  from  1904  to  1928, 
was  born  Dec.  25,  1872,  at  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James 
Cullimore  and  Clara  Fowlke.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  1895,  by  Seymour 
B.  Young,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1895-1897,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
April  24,  1904,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

GAMETT,  Clarence  Anazias,  Bishop 
of  the  Pleasant  Grove  1st  Ward,  Tim- 
panogos Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  15,  1884,  at 
Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  a  son  of  Amaz- 
ias  Gamett  and  Margaret  Poulsen.  He 


was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  April  24,  1927, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.  21,  1928,  by  David  0. 
McKay. 

JOHNSON,  Charles  G.,  Bishop  of 
the  Windsor  Ward,  Timpanogos  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1915  to  1924,  was  born 
Nov.  1,  1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Anders  Gustave  Johnson  and 
Charlotta  C.  Anderson.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  26,  1881,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty April  3,  1902,  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball, filled  a  mission  to  Scandinavia 
in  1902-1904,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  5,  1915,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

LOWE,  Alexander  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Windsor  (Lindon  2nd)  Ward,  Timpan- 
ogos Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930  + , 
was  born  Jan.  25,  1878,  at  Hooper, 
Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Alexander 
Lowe  and  Elizabeth  Adamson.  He 
was  baptized  March  5,  1906,  ordained 
an  Elder  March  4,  1907,  by  Joseph  H. 
Storrs,  filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1907-1909,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
June  23,  1920,  by  James  H.  Clark,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  31,  1924,  by 
James  E.  Talmage. 

OLPIN,  Joseph,  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Timpanogos 
Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1929,  was  born  Sept.  24,  1897,  at  Pleas- 
ant Grove,  Utah,  a  son  of  Edwin  D. 
Olpin  and  Inez  Robison.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  30,  1905,  ordained  an  Elder 
in  May,  1916,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1916-1919,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  April 
21,  1927,  by  George  F.  Richards,  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Lindon 
Ward,  which  position  he  held  until 
chosen  first  counselor  in  the  Timpan- 
ogos   Stake   presidency   July    1,    1928. 

THORNE,  David  Benjamin,  Bishop 
of    the     Lindon     Wai'd,     Timpanogos 


644 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  March  18,  1876,  at  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah,  a  son  of  Robert  Thorne 
and  Cordelia  Philanda  Walker.  He 
was  baptized  June  29,  1884,  ordained 
a  Seventy  Dec.  20,  1899,  by  Christian 
D.  Fjeldsted,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1899-1901,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  1,  1928,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.  21,  1928,  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay. 

WARNICK,   Howard    Benjamin, 

Bishop  of  the  Manila  Ward  (origin- 
ally the  Pleasant  Grove  3rd  Ward), 
Timpanogos  Stake,  Utah,  from  1907 
to  1924,  was  born  July  31,  1877,  at 
Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles 
P.  Warnick  and  Christine  Marie  Lar- 
sen  Sellebak.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old. 


Tintic  Stake 


BRADLEY,  Bigelow,  Bishop  of  the 
Mammoth  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept. 
27,  1896,  at  Moroni,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Andi-ew  L.  Bradley  and  Elsie 
M.  Larson.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  25, 
1904,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  13, 
1929,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman,  and  a 
Bishop  Oct.  12,  1930,  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay. 

CHATWIN,  Thomas  Edwin,  Bishop 
of  the  Mammoth  Ward,  Tintic  Stake, 
Juab  Co.,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1930, 
was  born  Sept.  27,  1882,  at  Santaquin, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William 
Chatwin  and  Irena  Carter.  He  was 
baptized  May  16,  1891,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  July  9,  1911,  by  Jonathan 
S.  Page,  jun.,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
April  22,  1917,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

CONNELLY,  Daniel,  Bishop  of  the 
Eureka  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab  Co., 
Utah,  from  1900  to  1908,  was  born 
June  19,  1861,  in  North  Leith,  Scot- 
land,  a   son   of   Daniel   Connelly   and 


Jessie  Ramsay.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
12,  1881,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  23,  1900,  by  Reed 
Smoot. 

CORBETT,  Pearson  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Eureka  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1928,  was 
born  Oct.  27,  1900,  at  Robertson  (Low- 
er Mammoth),  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Walter  S.  Corbett  and  Mary  E.  Har- 
ris. He  was  baptized  Dec.  27,  1908, 
ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  13,  1920,  by 
Orrice  Jerman,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Central  States  in  1923-1926,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  April  17,  1927,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

DYCHES,  Thomas  W.,  jun..  Bishop 
of  the  Silver  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1929,  was 
born  Sept.  23,  1877,  in  Wales,  Sanpete 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  W.  Dyches 
and  Sarah  Ann  Thomas.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  about  eight  years  old,  filled 
a  mission  to  California  in  1914-1916, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Jan.  16,  1927,  by  David  0.  Mc- 
Kay. 

ERCANBRACK,  Otis  L.,  Bishop  of 
the  Goshen  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1924,  a  son 
of  William  T.  Ercanbrack  and  Ruth 
Seaberry,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Oct.  21,  1917. 

FINCH,  George  Nephi,  Bishop  of 
the  Eureka  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1921  to  1927,  was  born 
May  11,  1891,  in  Goshen,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Hyrum  Finch  and  Mary 
Ann  Garbett.  He  was  baptized  in 
June,  1899,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  16,  1921,  by  James  E.  Talmage, 
who  also  ordained  him  a  Bishop  April 
17,  1921. 

GAGON,  Joseph  Albert,  Bishop  of 
the  Knightsville  Ward,  Tintic  Stake, 
Juab  Co.,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1924, 
was  born  Dec.  15,  1879,  at  Vernal, 
Uintah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  H. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


645 


Gagon  and  Lydia  Ann  Taylor.  He 
was  baptized  when  nine  years  old,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  1912,  by  Charles 
H.  Hart,  filled  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain  in  1913-1915,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  26,  1916,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
21,  1918,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

GOODMAN,  John  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Silver  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1925  to  1926,  was  born 
April  11,  1881,  in  Provo,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  the  son  of  William  H.  Goodman 
and  Elizabeth  A.  Ellison.  He  was 
baptized  May  17,  1890,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  18,  1925, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

HALES,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Mammoth  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1897  to  1903,  and 
Bishop  of  the  Spanish  Fork  3rd  Ward, 
Palmyra  Stake,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1904  to  1916,  was  born  Aug.  12,  1865, 
in  Spanish  Fork,  Utah,  the  son  of 
George  G.  Hales  and  Tryphena  Brad- 
ford. He  was  baptized  Sept.  30,  1874, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Jan.  3,  1887,  by 
Charles  Monk,  filled  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand  in  1890-1892,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  19,  1895,  by  William 
Paxman,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  May 
23,  1897,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith.  He 
filled  a  mission  to  California  in  1926. 

LAUTENSOCK,  Peter,  president  of 
the  Swiss  and  German  Mission  from 
1897  to  1898,  and  Bishop  of  the  Eur- 
eka Ward,  Juab  Co.,  Utah,  from  1893 
to  1900,  was  born  Jan.  31,  1848,  at 
Wattenheim,  Rhein,  Bavaria,  the  son 
of  Charles  P.  Lautensock  and  Maria 
K.  Holz.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  30, 
1874,  at  Karlsruhe,  Germany,  ordained 
an  Elder  in  February,  1875,  filled  a 
mission  to  Minnesota  in  1883-1884, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June  15, 
1893,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

PRICE,  William,  Bishop  of  the  Go- 
shen  Ward,   Tintic    Stake,   Juab    Co., 


Utah,  from  1860  to  1896,  was  born 
Dec.  4,  1818,  in  Lea,  Gloucestershire, 
England,  a  son  of  William  Price  and 
Mary  Ann  Price.  He  was  baptized  in 
March,  1841,  at  Herefordshire,  Eng- 
land, ordained  a  Seventy  in  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Feb.  15,  1860,  by  Pres. 
Brigham  Young.  He  died  Sept.  18, 
1906. 

REESE,  Charles  W.,  Bishop  of  the 
Silver  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab  Co., 
Utah,  from  1917  to  1918,  was  born 
April  8,  1869,  in  Payson,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Enoch  Reese  and  Amy 
Wightman.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  3, 
1901,  and  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the 
Silver  Ward  April  29,  1917,  and  or- 
dained by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

ROUNDY,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Knightsville  Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah,  from  1901  to  1909,  was  born 
May  18,  1864,  at  Springville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Loren  H.  Roundy  and  Jane 
Koyle.  He  was  baptized  June  5,  1898, 
and  oi'dained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Aug.  4,  1901,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

SMITH,  John  S.,  Bishop  of  the  Sil- 
ver Ward,  Tintic  Stake,  Juab  Co., 
Utah,  from  1909  to  1913,  was  born  Oct. 
21,  1882,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  G.  Smith  and  Hester  Sims. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  4,  1890,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  27,  1909,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

TAYLOR,  George  Harris,  Bishop  of 
the  Knightsville  Ward,  Tintic  Stake, 
Juab  Co.,  Utah,  from  1915  to  1917, 
was  born  Feb.  9,  1882,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  E.  Tay- 
lor and  Emma  Harris.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  of  age,  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Feb.  20,  1916,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 


Tooele  Stake 


ANDERSON,  George  Noel,  Bishop 
of    the    Clover    Ward,    Tooele    Stake, 


646 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Jan.  3,  1888,  in  Grantsville,  Tooele 
Co.,  Utah,  a  .son  of  Gustave  Anderson 
and  Emily  J.  Hunter.  He  was  baptized 
when  about  eight  years  old,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct. 

5,  1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

BRYAN,  George  W.,  Bishop  of  the 
Mercur  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1900  to  1906,  was  born  Aug.  21, 
1871,  in  Batesville,  Tooele  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  George  W.  Bryan  and  Mar- 
garet Simpson.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 

6,  1883,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  1,  1900,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

BRYAN,  John  Carver,  Bishop  of  the 
Batesville  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1912  to  1915,  and  Bishop  of  the 
Tooele  North  Ward  from  1929  to  1930  -f- , 
was  born  April  25,  1875,  in  Batesville, 
Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  George  W. 
Bryan  and  Margaret  Simpson.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  6,  1883,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Nov.  26,  1911,  by  Joseph 
C.  Orme,  ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  28, 
1912,  by  George  F.  Richards,  and  set 
apart  as  Bishop  of  the  Tooele  North 
Ward  June  30,  1929,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

BRYAN,  William  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Batesville  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1924,  was  born 
April  10,  1876,  in  Batesville,  Tooele 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  George  Woodward 
Bryan  and  Margaret  Simpson.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1885,  ordained 
an  Elder  May  25,  1899,  by  Edward 
C.  Ekman,  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia in  1897-1900,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  July  24,  1904,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  19,  1919, 
by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

BURRIDGE.  George  Wilcox,  Bishop 
of  the  St.  John  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1888,  was  born 
Jan.  17,  1813,  in  Somersetshire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  Thomas  Burridge  and 
Ann  Wilcox.     He   was  baptized  July 


4,  1852,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1855, 
was  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  13,  1853, 
by  Daniel  D.  McArthur,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1867-1868, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  30, 
1875,  and  a  Bishop  June  24,  1877. 

CALDWELL,  David  Henry,  Bishop 
of  the  St.  John  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1888  to  1898,  was  born 
Sept.  12,  1828,  in  Upper  Canada,  a 
son  of  David  Caldwell  and  Mary  Ann 
Vaughn.  He  was  baptized  about  1850, 
emigrated  to  Utah  in  1853,  was  or- 
dained to  the  Priesthood,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Lamanites  in  1876,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman.     He  died  Dec.  18,  1926. 

EKMAN,  Edward  C,  Bishop  of  the 
Batesville  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1908  to  1912,  was  born  Jan.  14, 
1867,  in  Drammen,  Norway,  a  son  of 
Johan  F.  Ekman  and  Eliza  Scow.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  20,  1877,  filled  a 
mission  to  Norway  in  1905-1908,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  April  2,  1899, 
by  Hugh  S.  Gowans,  and  a  Bishop 
June  28,  1908,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

ENGLAND,  Azile  Lawrence,  Bishop 

of  the  Tooele  North  Ward,  Tooele 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1929,  was 
born  Oct.  14,  1886,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  England  and  Eliza  Ken- 
nington.  He  was  baptized  July  31, 
1897,  ordained  an  Elder  May  12,  1908, 
by  Hugh  S.  Gowans,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Central  States  in  1908-1910,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  19,  1918, 
by  Charles  R.  McBride,  and  a  Bishop 
April  15,  1923,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

GILLETT,  John  Joshua,  Bishop  of 
the  Tooele  North  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1915  to  1918,  was  born 
January  24,  1873,  at  E  T  City,  Tooele 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Samuel  Gillett  and 
Nioma  Chapels.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  23,  1901,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  6,  1911,  by  Hugh  S.  Gowans, 
and  a  Bishop  March  7,  1915,  by  George 
F.  Richards. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


647 


GREEN,  John  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Clover  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  27,  1883,  in 
Schofield,  Carbon  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  James  Green  and  Annie 
Amelia  Williams.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  3,  1892,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  5,  1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard, 
and  sustained  as  a  Bishop  Jan.  19, 
1930. 

HANKS,  Alfred  Lyman,  Bishop  of 
the  Tooele  North  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1918  to  1923,  was  born 
Aug.  28,  1880,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Alfred  F.  Hanks  and  Nellie  Lyman. 
Having  been  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  he  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  29,  1912,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  Jan.  19,  1918, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

KNOWLTON,  Frank  Forrest,  Bish- 
op of  the  Grantsville  1st  Ward,  Tooele 
Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan. 
21,  1881,  at  Knowlton's  Ranch,  Tooele 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Quincy 
Knowlton,  and  Maryette  Vanderhoof. 
He  was  baptized  Sept.  21,  1889,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Oct.  8,  1900,  by  Sey- 
mour B.  Young,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southwestern  States  in  1900-1902,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Jan.  12,  1930. 

LEE,  Joseph  W.,  Bishop  of  the  Mer- 
cur  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1906  to  1908,  was  born  June  26,  1862, 
in  Santa  Clara,  Washington  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Samuel  F.  Lee  and  Ann  White. 
He  was  baptized  in  1871,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  March  11,  1906,  by  Francis 
M.   Lyman. 

McBRIDE,  Charles  Reuben,  first 
counselor  in  the  Tooele  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1908  to  1928,  was 
born  Oct.  1,  1856,  in  Fillmore,  Millard 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Reuben  A.  McBride 
and  Harriet  Columbia  Williams.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Hugh  S. 
Gowans,  and  set  apart  as  first  counse- 


lor Sept.  28,  1908,  by  George  F.  Rich- 
ards. 

McINTOSH,  William,  presiding  El- 
der of  the  Clover  Branch,  Tooele 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1864  to  1865,  was 
born  Sept.  16,  1819,  near  Edinburgh, 
Scotland,  a  son  of  John  Mcintosh  and 
Grace  Rankin.  He  was  baptized  in 
Scotland  and  came  to  Utah  in  1852. 

MOSES,  Martin,  Bishop  of  the  Lake 
View  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1877  to  1888,  was  born  Aug.  26,  1824, 
in  Campsie,  Dumbartonshire,  Scotland, 
a  son  of  Peter  Martin  Moses  and 
Mary  Bell.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  26, 
1845,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1853,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op June  24,  1877,  by  John  Taylor. 

MOSS,  Alexander,  Bishop  of  the 
Mercur  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1908  to  1912,  was  born  June 
6,  1874,  in  Bountiful,  Davis  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Moss  and  Emma  Alex- 
ander. He  was  baptized  Nov.  26,  1882, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  28,  1907, 
by  Charles  A.  Orme,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  in  1908. 

MOSS,  William  F.,  Bishop  of  the 
Lake  Point  (formerly  E  T  City)  Ward, 
Tooele  Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1901, 
was  born  Nov.  15,  1825,  in  Notting- 
hamshire, England.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  23,  1848,  ordained  an  Elder  in 
1852,  labored  as  a  local  missionary  in 
1852-1861,  and  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1861,  In  1869  he  was  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  E  T  City  branch  and 
when  the  branch  became  a  ward  Jan. 
25,  1877,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  John  Taylor.  In  1901  he  was  or- 
dained a  Patriarch  and  in  1908  he 
moved  to  East  Garland,  Utah,  where 
he  died  Sept.  20,  1908. 

ORME,  Edwin  Marshall,  Bishop  of 
the  Batesville  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1904  to  1906,  was  born 
July  19,  1874,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Samuel  W.  Orme  and  Sarah  Ci'oss. 


648 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


He  was  baptized  in  August,  1882,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  May  11,  1899,  by 
Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  in  1899-1901,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op July  24,  1904,  by  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man. 

ORME,  Joseph  Cross,  Bishop  of  the 
Tooele  North  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1915,  was  born 
Aug.  1,  1860,  in  Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Samuel  Washington  Orme  and 
Sarah  Cross.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
6,  1869,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
26,  1897,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and 
a  Bishop  Dec.  29,  1912,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

ORME,  Silas  Cross,  Bishop  of  the 
Tooele  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1905  to  1911,  was  born  Dec. 
26,  1864,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Samuel  W.  Orme  and  Sarah  Cross. 
He  was  baptized  March  28,  1874,  or- 
dained an  Elder  Oct.  1,  1894,  by  Hugh 
S.  Gowans,  filled  a  mission  to  Colo- 
rado in  1902-1904,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan;  29, 
1905,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

PAGET,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the  Lake 
Point  (formerly  the  E  T  City)  Ward, 
Tooele  Stake,  Utah,  from  1907  to  1909, 
was  born  May  25,  1874,  in  Yorkshire, 
England,  a  son  of  Stephen  Paget  and 
Selina  E.  Crich.  He  was  baptized 
June  4,  1882,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov. 
25,  1896,  by  Seymour  B.  Young  and 
sustained    as    Bishop    Nov.    17,    1907. 

PARK,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the  Tooele 
South  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1929  to  1930+ ,  was  born  July  18, 
1899,  in  Tooele,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Robert  Park  and  Caroline  Hoagland. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  2,  1907,  or- 
dained an  Elder  Dec.  27,  1920,  by  Peter 
M.  Clegg,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States  in  1921-1923,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  17,  1928,  by  George 
F.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop  Jan.  13, 
1929,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 


RUSSELL,  John  Thomas,  Bishop  of 
the  St.  John  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1905  to  1915,  was  born  Jan.  27, 
1857,  in  Taylorsville,  Salt  Lake  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  G.  Russell  and 
Elizabeth  Vickrey.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  9,  1905, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

RUSSELL,  Joseph  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Clover  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1913,  was  born 
April  8,  1887,  in  St.  John,  Tooele  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  S.  Russell  and 
Margaret  Charles.  He  was  baptized 
Aug.  23,  1896,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Oct.  30,  1910,  by  Charles  R.  McBride, 
and  sustained  as  Bishop  March  24, 
1912. 

SHIELDS,  Francis  Marion,  Bishop 
of  the  Lake  View  Ward,  Tooele  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  15,  1896,  a  son  of  Alexander  J. 
Shields  and  Mary  J.  Adamson.  He 
was  baptized  in  1905,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  12,  1925, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

STOOKEY,    Mahonri    Moriancumr, 

Bishop  of  the  Clover  Ward,  Tooele 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1901  to  1912,  was 
born  Sept.  24,  1870,  in  Clover,  Tooele 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Enos  Stookey  and 
Jamima  E.  Child.  He  was  baptized 
June  10,  1881,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov, 
5,  1896,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  ordain- 
ed a  High  Priest  Oct.  14, 1900,  by  Hugh 
S.  Gowans,  and  sustained  as  Bishop 
June  15,  1901. 

TUTTLE,  Norton  Ray,  Bishop  of 
the  Tooele  Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1877  to  1880,  was  born  May  12, 
1830,  in  North  Haven,  New  Haven  Co., 
Connecticut,  a  son  of  Edward  Tuttle 
and  Sarah  Clinton.  He  was  baptized 
April  3,  1848,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1852,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June 
24,  1877. 

WRATHALL,    James    Leishman, 

Bishop  of  the  Grantsville  Ward,  Tooele 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


649 


Stake,  Utah,  from  1890  to  1906,  was 
born  Sept.  22,  1860,  in  Grantsville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  Wrathall  and 
Mary  Leishman.  He  was  baptized 
June  11,  1871,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  28,  1890. 

YATES,  William,  George,  Bishop  of 
the  Lake  Point  (formerly  E  T  City) 
Ward,  Tooele  Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  , 
was  born  Sept.  17,  1879,  in  Lake  Point, 
Tooele  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Yates  and  Elizabeth  P.  Maxwell.  He 
was  baptized  in  1887,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan. 
12,  1930,  by  George  F.  Richards. 


Twin  Falls  Stake 

DIXON,  Asael  H.,  Bishop  of  the 
Buhl  Ward,  Twin  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1924  and  from  1926  to 
1929,  was  born  Aug.  3,  1888,  in  Afton, 
Wyo.,  a  son  of  Harvey  Dixon  and 
Kittie  Pritchett.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
6,  1899,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  July  28,  1919,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

DODD,  Lewis  Abel,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Hollister  Branch,  Twin  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1925  to  1926,  was 
born  May  24,  1868,  a  son  of  Jacob 
Dodd  and  Elizabeth  Abtl.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  7,  1892,  and  sustained 
April  19,  1925,  as  presiding  Elder. 

FLYNN,  Clifford  Clinton,  Bishop  of 
the  Buhl  Ward,  Twin  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1924  to  1926,  was  born 
March  4,  1891,  in  Cressville,  Tenn.,  a 
son  of  Thomas  S.  Flynn  and  Flora 
Brown.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  12, 1921, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  14, 
1924,  by  Jesse  W.  Richens. 

HUNT,  Jonathan  Nephi,  Bishop  of 
the  Buhl  Ward,  Twin  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  11,  1877,  in  Hebron,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Jonathan  Hunt  and  Susan  C.  Nan- 


ny. He  was  baptized  in  1885,  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  May,  1903,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Central  States  in  1903-1905 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  27, 
1929,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

HUNT,    Mitchell    Wiggins,    Bishop 

of  the  Twin  Falls  Ward,  Twin  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  in  1930  (from  Jan.  26 
to  Oct.  26),  was  born  June  10,  1897, 
in  Richmond,  Utah,  a  son  of  Enoch 
Jefferson  Hunt,  sen.,  and  Eliza  Re- 
becca Whitaker.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
14,  1905,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Jan.  26,  1930,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

GROVER,  George  Fredrick,  presid- 
ing Elder  of  the  Hollister  Branch, 
Twin  Falls  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1924 
to  1925,  was  born  Jan.  8,  1884,  at  Oak- 
ley, Idaho,  a  son  of  Walter  L.  Grover 
and  Celia  Millard.  He  was  baptized 
July  22,  1893,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  1,  1924,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

KIRKMAN,  Lawrence  Gomer,  presi- 
dent of  the  Twin  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1919  to  1930,  was  born  May  31, 
1874,  in  Springville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  Kirkman  and  Annie  Jones.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Oct.  17,  1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
presided  over  the  Twin  Falls  Ward 
from  1911  to  1919,  and  was  set  apart 
as  president  of  the  stake  July  26,  1919, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

LEE,  Alfred  Dorris,  Bishop  of  the 
Murtaugh  Ward,  Twin  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1921  to  1925,  was  born 
Jan.  13,  1890,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  A.  O.  Lee  and  Elizabeth  Cor- 
bett.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  30,  1913, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  14,  1919, 
by  Lawrence  G.  Kirkman,  and  a  Bish- 
op in  1921.     He  died  Nov.  1,  1925. 

MANNING,  David  Henry,  Bishop 
of  the  Murtaugh  Ward,  Twin  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1920  to  1921,  was 


650 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


born  April  1,  1889,  in  Farmington, 
Utah,  a  son  of  David  E.  Manning  and 
Margaret  Wilcox.  He  was  baptized 
July  4,  1897,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Dec.  14,  1919,  by  Raymond  McClellan, 
and  a  Bishop  June  6,  1920,  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney. 

MERRILL,  Adrian  A.,  Bishop  of 
the  Murtaugh  Ward,  Twin  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1919  to  1920,  was  born 
Dec.  12,  1890,  in  Richmond,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Alma  Merrill  and  Rebecca  Hen- 
dricks. He  was  baptized  Jan.  10,  1899, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op May  27,  1919,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards. 

MOVES,  David  Gown,  Bishop  of  the 
Murtaugh  Ward,  Twin  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  13,  1889,  in  Huntsville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  G.  Moyes  and  Sarah 
Ann  Allen.  He  was  baptized  June  5, 
1897,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  7, 
1921,  by  Rudger  Clawson,  who  also 
ordained  him  a  Bishop  Oct.  25,  1925. 

OLSEN,  Niels  Albert,  Bishop  of  the 
Kimberly  Ward,  Twin  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
July  13,  1880,  in  Villingebak,  Fred- 
eriksborg  amt,  Denmark,  a  son  of 
Andreas  Olsen  and  Ane  Jensine  Niel- 
sen. He  came  to  Utah  in  1899,  was 
baptized  July  1,  1916,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Aug.  25,  1918,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  1,  1926,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

SUDWEEKS,  Joseph  Hyrum,  Bish- 
op of  the  Kimberly  Ward,  Twin  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1921,  was 
born  Dec.  21,  1858,  in  Nephi,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Henry  Sudweeks  and  Sarah 
Sweet.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  21,  1866, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  10,  1909, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop 
Oct.  23,  1915,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 
He  died  Dec.  18,  1934,  in  Kimberly, 
Idaho. 


TOLMAN,  Judson  Isaac,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Murtaugh  Branch,  Twin 
Falls  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1917, 
was  born  Jan.  21,  1870,  in  Tooele, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Cyrus  Tolnian  and 
Alice  Braken.  He  was  baptized  April 
15,  1888,  and  sustained  as  presiding 
Elder  May  9,  1916. 

WEBB,  Edward  Mile,  president  of 
the  Hollister  Branch,  Twin  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1921  to  1924,  was 
born  Feb.  27,  1869,  in  Deseret,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Edward  Webb  and  Elizabeth 
Home.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  3, 
1896,  and  sustained  as  presiding  Elder 
March  24,  1921.    He  died  April  4,  1924. 

WILKINS,  Etson  Buriah,  Bishop  of 
the  Kimberly  Ward,  Twin  Falls  Stake, 
Idaho,  from  1909  to  1915,  was  born 
Nov.  17,  1862,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Alexander  Wilkins  and  Alice  Ma- 
lera  Barney.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
18,  1872,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  May  10,  1909,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman. 

WOOD,  Roy,  Bishop  of  the  Kimber- 
ly Ward,  Twin  Falls  Stake,  Idaho, 
from  1921  to  1926,  was  born  April  12, 
1892,  in  Bates,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Samuel 
L.  Wood  and  Mary  Ann  Cockeril.  He 
was  baptized  July  6,  1901,  ordained  an 
Elder  May  25,  1912,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1912-1914,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  23,  1915, 
by  John  L.  Smith,  and  a  Bishop  Feb. 
7,    1921,   by   Rudger   Clawson. 

WRAY,  James  Enos,  presiding  Eld- 
er of  the  Hollister  Branch,  Twin  Falls 
Stake,  Idaho,  from  1926  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  April  22,  1877,  in  Hyrum, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  Wray 
and  Louisa  Jensen.  He  was  baptized 
in  May,  1895,  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct. 
26,  1900,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1900-1903.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  17,  1913,  and  set  apart  as. 
presiding  Elder  Aug.  1,  1926, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


651 


Uintah  Stake 

ABPLANALP,  Peter,  Bishop  of  the 
Glines  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1887  to  1899,  was  born  March 
2,  1829,  in  Brienzwyler,  Switzerland, 
a  son  of  Johannes  Abplanalp  and  Kat- 
rine Schilt.  He  emigrated  to  Amer- 
ica in  1858,  was  baptized  Nov.  23, 
1859,  in  New  York  State,  came  to  Utah 
in  1861,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
May  9,  1887,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

BARTLETT,  Charles  Bart,  Bishop 
of  the  Liberty  (Tridell)  Ward,  Uin- 
tah Stake,  Utah,  from  1911  to  1916, 
was  born  Aug.  27,  1869,  in  Mountain 
Dell,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  C.  Bartlett  and  Ane  Katrine 
Jensen.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  Australia 
in  1892-1895,  and  again  in  1902-1905, 
when  he  presided  over  the  Australian 
Mission.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  26,  1911,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

BATTY,  Miles  Marquis,  Bishop  of 
the  Glines  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1914  to  1926,  was  born  June  12, 
1865,  in  Wanship,  Utah,  a  son  of  Miles 
Batty  and  Mary  Henrietta  Mecham. 
He  was  baptized  June  7,  1886,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1907-1909, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Sept.  19, 
1914,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

BENNION,  David,  first  counselor  in 
the  presidency  of  the  Uintah  Stake, 
from  1910  to  1919,  was  born  Feb.  1, 
1865,  in  Vernon,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
Bennion  and  Esther  Birch.  He  was 
baptized  March  23,  1873,  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Heber  J.  Grant  and  presided 
over  the  Vernal  2nd  Ward  from  1909 
to  1910.  He  was  chosen  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  Sept.  18,  1910,  by 
Reed  Smoot. 

BINGHAM,  Calvin  Perry,  Bishop  of 
the  Mountain  Dell  Ward,  Uintah 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1890  to  1900,  was 


born  Jan.  28,  1852,  in  Pottawattamie 
Co.,  Iowa,  a  son  of  Calvin  Bingham 
and  Lucretia  Thorne.  He  came  to 
Utah  in  1854,  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov. 

17,  1889,  by  Reuben  S.  Collett,  and  a 
Bishop  Nov.  15,  1890.  He  died  June 
4,  1922. 

BINGHAM,  Fred  G.,  Bishop  of  the 
Vernal  2nd  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1910  to  1911,  was  born  Nov.  4, 
1882,  in  Mountain  Dell,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Thomas  Bingham  and  Margaret  L. 
Troerer.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  17, 
1890,   and   sustained   as   Bishop   Sept. 

18,  1910. 

CALDER,  Hyrum  Bennion,  Bishop 
of  the  Vernal  1st  Ward,  Uintah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1927,  was  born 
May  26,  1873,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  a 
son  of  George  Calder  and  Mary  Ben- 
nion. He  was  baptized  Sept.  1,  1881, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  11,  1897, 
filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in 
1897-1898,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  18,  1910,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

CALDWELL,      Thomas      Jeflferson, 

sen.,  Bishop  of  the  Naples  (Merrill) 
Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1887  to  1890,  was  born  July  17,  1844, 
in  Illinois,  a  son  of  Matthew  Caldwell 
and  Burzella  Gaymon.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  9,  1887,  by  John 
Henry  Smith. 

CALDWELL,  Thomas  Jefiferson, 
jun..  Bishop  of  the  Jensen  Ward,  Uin- 
tah Stake,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1925, 
was  born  March  5,  1868,  in  Fountain 
Green,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  J.  Cald- 
well and  Mary  Ann  Petersen.  He  was 
baptized  when  nine  years  old,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1897-1898,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
May  18,  1916,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

COLTON,  Don  B.,  president  of  the 
Uintah  Stake,  Utah,  from  1910  to  1921, 
was    born   Sept.    15,    1876,   in   Mona, 


652 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah,  a  son  of  Sterling  Driggs  Colton 
and  Nancy  A.  Wilkins.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  4,  1893,  filled  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1896-1898,  and  was 
set  apart  Sept.  18,  1910,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman  as  president  of  the  Uintah 
Stake. 

COLTON,  Sterling  Driggs,  Bishop 
of  the  Maeser  (Mill))  Ward,  Uintah 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1896  to  1910,  was 
born  March  22,  1851,  in  Provo,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Philander  Colton  and  Polly 
Matilda  Merrill.  He  was  baptized  in 
1859,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug.  11, 
1896,  by  John  W.  Taylor.  He  died 
Oct.  20,  1933,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

CRAMER,  Eric  Adolph,  Bishop  of 
the  Ashley  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1919  to  1924,  was  born  Sept.  30, 
1888,  in  Huntsville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  C.  Cramer  and  Anna  C.  Larson. 
He  was  baptized  July  4,  1897,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Sept.  21,  1919,  by 
Geo.  F.  Richards. 

DAVIS,  John  Nightingale,  Bishop 
of  the  Vernal  Ward,  Uintah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1898  to  1909  and  of  the 
Vernal  1st  Ward  from  1909  to  1910, 
was  born  Oct.  19,  1864,  a  son  of  Ed- 
ward W.  Davis  and  Jemima  Night- 
ingale. He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
June  28,  1895,  by  Abraham  H.  Can- 
non and  a  Bishop  July  24,  1898,  by 
Abraham  0,  Woodruff. 

EATON,  John  Burton,  Bishop  of  the 
Glines  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec. 
7,  1876,  in  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Joseph  Eaton  and  Elizabeth  Walk- 
er. He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  June 
3,  1906,  by  Geo.  A.  Smith,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1909-1911,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
June  27,  1926,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

FREESTONE,  George,  Bishop  of 
the  Ashley  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1887  to  1898,  was  born  Aug.  13, 


1837,  on  Prince  Edward's  Island,  Can- 
ada, the  son  of  Thomas  Fi-eestone  and 
Ann  Fall.  He  was  baptized  in  1854, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  9, 
1887,  by  John  Henry  Smith.  He  died 
Aug.   26,   1920. 

GOODRICH,  Byron,  Bishop  of  the 
Naples  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov. 
23,  1887,  in  Vernal,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Geo.  A.  Goodrich  and  Eliza  A.  Tag- 
gart.  He  was  baptized  May  6,  1896, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  27,  1923, 
by  Albert  G.  Goodrich,  and  a  Bishop 
June  27,  1925,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

HACKING,  James  Clair,  Bishop  of 
the  La  Point  Ward,  Uintah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 -|-,  was  born 
Jan.  1,  1878,  in  Cedar  Fort,  Utah,  a  son 
of  James  Hacking  and  Anna  Maria 
Glines.  He  was  baptized  July  11,  1886, 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  June,  1897,  by 
Geo.  Reynolds,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1897-1899,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct. 
16,  1927,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

IVERSON,  Charles  M.,  Bishop  of 
the  Naples  (Merrill)  Ward,  Uintah 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1925,  was 
born  Sept.  12,  1887,  in  Salem,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Andrew  Iverson  and  Julia 
M.  Olsen.  He  was  baptized  Oct,  3, 
1897,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb.  27, 
1923,  by  Nelson  Merkley,  and  a  Bish- 
op June  23,  1923,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage. 

JOHNSON,  Andrew  Theodore,  Bish- 
op of  the  Vernal  2nd  Ward,  Uintah 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930,  was 
born  Jan.  2,  1881,  in  Wanship,  Summit 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Andrew  Johnson 
and  Emma  Rasmussen.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1889,  filled  a  mission  to  Swe- 
den in  1910-1914,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  29,  1925,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards,  and  sustained  as  Bishop  Jan. 
16,  1927. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


653 


KIDD,  Thomas  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Ashley  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1915  to  1919,  was  born  Oct.  27, 
1887,  at  Riverton,  Utah,  a  son  of  Alex- 
ander B.  Kidd  and  Sarah  E.  Wright. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1896,  filled  a 
mission  to  Gi-eat  Britain  in  1912-1914, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  June  20, 
1915,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

MARSHALL,  William  Calvin,  Bish- 
op of  the  La  Point  Ward,  Uintah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1927,  was  born 
Sept.  19,  1866,  in  Nester,  Carroll  Co., 
Virginia.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Jan.  25,  1925,  and  a  Bishop 
Sept.  26,  1926,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

MERRILL,  Porter  William,  presid- 
ing Elder  in  Naples  (Merrill)  Ward, 
Uintah  Stake,  Utah,  in  1884,  was  born 
Sept.  10,  1846,  in  Farmington,  Iowa, 
a  son  of  Hosea  Merrill  and  Anna  Sax- 
ton.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1850,  and 
was  appointed  presiding  Elder  in 
January,  1884,  by  Bishop  Jeremiah 
Hatch.     He  died  Aug.  29,  1884. 

MORRILL,  Horace,  Bishop  of  the 
Tridell  (Liberty)  Ward,  Uintah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1916  to  1929,  was  born 
July  18,  1863,  in  Johnson,  Iron  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Laban  Morrill  and  Per- 
melia  Drury.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
18,  1861,  ordained  an  Elder  by  Thomas 
J.  Jones,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
ern States  in  1887-1889,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  in  1911,  and  a  Bishop 
Aug.  27,  1916,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 

MORRILL,  Horace  LeRoy,  Bishop 
of  the  Tridell  (Liberty)  Ward,  Uintah 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Feb.  4,  1884,  at  Junction, 
Piute  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Horace  Mor- 
rill and  Elizabeth  Isola  Davis.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  4,  1898,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May 
5,  1929,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

PREECE,  Alma,  Bishop  of  the  Ash- 
ley Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah,  from 


1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  26, 
1889,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
Heber  Preece  and  Isadora  Jameson. 
He  was  baptized  in  1897,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  March  29,  1925,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Nov.  11,  1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

REMINGTON,    Fuller    Rasmussen, 

Bishop  of  the  Naples  Ward,  Uintah 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1919  to  1922,  was 
born  Jan.  17, 1891,  in  Merrill  (Naples), 
Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  Fuller  Reming- 
ton and  Amanda  Rasmussen.  He  was 
baptized  in  January,  1899,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept. 
21,  1919,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

RICHARDSON,  Archibald  S.,  Bish- 

of  the  Jensen  Ward,  Uintah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1908  to  1916,  was  born 
Dec.  11,  1863,  in  Heber,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  Richardson  and  Joan  Foth- 
eringham.  He  was  baptized  in  July, 
1872,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  30, 
1892,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  a 
Bishop  Aug.  23,  1908,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman. 

SHAFFER,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Maeser  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1887  to  1896,  was  born  March 
9,  1827,  in  Rushville,  Rush  Co.,  Illi- 
nois, a  son  of  Henry  Shaffer  and  Eva 
Baird.  He  was  baptized  in  August, 
1852,  came  to  the  Valley  that  year,  and 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  May  9,  1887, 
by  John  Henry  Smith.  He  died  Jan. 
31,  1898,  in  Maeser,  Utah. 

SIMPER,  Alfred,  Bishop  of  the 
Davis  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1913  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  3, 
1884,  in  East  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Thomas  R.  Simper  and'  Martha 
Elizabeth  Swain.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  18,  1893,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Jan.  5,  1913,  by  James  M.  Shaffer,  and 
a  Bishop  June  15,  1913,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards. 

TAYLOR,  Roy,  Bishop  of  the  La 
Point  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah,  from 


654 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


1916  to  1925,  was  born  Feb.  18,  1872, 
in  Levan,  Utah,  a  son  of  Martin  V. 
Taylor  and  Joannah  Jennings.  He 
was  baptized  June  6,  1886,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Sept.  10,  1916,  by  Don 
B.  Colton,  and  sustained  as  Bishop 
Dec.  31,  1916. 

WALL,  Fredrick,  Bishop  of  the 
Jensen  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug. 
21,  1891,  in  Jensen,  a  son  of  Heber  R. 
Wall  and  Lydia  M.  Chatwin.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  1,  1899,  ordained  an 
Elder  Apr.  4,  1915,  by  Heber  R.  Wall, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
in  1915-1917,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  May  11,  1924,  by  Ernest  Eaton, 
and  a  Bishop  March  29,  1925,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards. 

WALLIS,  James  Hearknett,  Bishop 
of  the  Vernal  1st  Ward,  Uintah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
April  13,  1861,  in  London,  England, 
a  son  of  James  Wallis  and  Jane  Sarah 
Booth.  He  was  baptized  May  20,  1877, 
came  to  Utah  in  1881,  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Oct.  2,  1880,  by  John  Nicholson, 
filled  several  missions,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Nov.  3,  1913,  by  Francis 
M.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  16, 
1928,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

WILKINS,  George  E.,  Bishop  of  the 
Vernal  2nd  Ward,  Uintah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1911  to  1927,  was  born  Nov.  1, 
1876,  in  Peoa,  Utah,  the  son  of  Oscar 
Wilkins  and  Elizabeth  Durrah.  He 
was  baptized  April  16,  1885,  ordained 
a  Sev.enty  April  11,  1898,  by  Albert  R. 
Smith,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
western States  in  1898-1900,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  7,  1905,  by 
Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bishop  Sept. 
10,  1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 


Union  Stake 


ABBOTT,   John    Austin,   Bishop   of 
the  Cove  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Oregon, 


from  1903  to  1909  was  born  Aug.  12, 
1871,  in  Square  Town  (or  Plymouth), 
Utah,  a  son  of  Myron  Abbott  and 
Laurie  Josephine  Allen.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  filled  a 
mission  to  New  Zealand  in  1898-1902, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  7,  1903,  by  Anthon  H. 
Lund. 

BILLINGS,  Leonard  Boyd,  Bishop 
of  the  Imbler  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Ore- 
gon, from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Oct.  10,  1889,  in  Manti,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Leonard  Billings  and  Mary  Westen- 
skow.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  22,  1898, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op March  21,  1926,  by  Hyrum  G. 
Smith. 

BLACK,  Charles  Jefferson,  first 
counselor  in  the  Union  Stake  presi- 
dency, Oregon,  from  1921  to  1928,  was 
born  Nov.  24,  1866,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a 
son  of  George  D.  Black  and  Mary 
Hunt.  He  was  baptized  July  9,  1875, 
ordained  a  Bishop  Dec.  15,  1907,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  presided  over 
the  La  Grande  Ward,  Oregon,  from 
1907  to  1921.    He  died  May  21,  1928. 

EARDLEY,  James  Walter,  Bishop 
of  the  Baker  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Ore- 
gon, from  1921  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  1,  1854,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  James  Eardley  and  Zurviah 
G.  Fuller.  He  was  baptized  in  1864, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1880-1882,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  29,  1912,  by  Franklin  S. 
Bramwell,  and  a  Bishop  April  3,  1921, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

ENGLAND,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
La  Grande  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Oregon, 
from  1901  to  1902,  and  Bishop  of  the 
Union  ward  of  the  same  stake, 
from  1902  to  1905,  was  born  May  24, 
1851,  in  Bradpool,  Dorsetshire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  John  England  and  Jane 
Paverd.  He  was  baptized  in  1862,  em- 
igrated to  Utah  in  that  year,  was  or- 


f 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


665 


dained  a  High  Priest  June  17,  1900, 
by  Franklin  S.  Bramwell,  ordained  a 
Bishop  June  9,  1901,  by  Mathias  F. 
Cowley,  and  set  apart  as  Bishop  of 
Union  Ward  March  9,   1902. 

HANKS,  William  David,  president 
of  the  Union  Stake,  Oregon,  from  1918 
to  1930,  was  born  Jan.  14,  1874,  in 
Paragonah,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
George  William  Hanks  and  Elizabeth 
Edwards.  He  was  baptized  July  16, 
1882,  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  12,  1909,  by  Anthony  W. 
Ivins,  served  as  Bishop  of  the  Union 
Ward  from  1910  to  1914,  and  was  set 
apart  as  stake  president  March  17, 
1918,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

JENSEN,  Lewis  M.,  Bishop  of  the 
Imbler  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Oregon, 
from  1907  to  1909  and  from  1913  to 
1914,  was  born  May  10,  1873,  in  Manti, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Hans  Jensen  and  Marie 
Christensen.  He  was  baptized  June 
2,  1881,  ordained  a  High  Pi-iest  March 
20,  1904,  by  Lehi  Wright,  and  a  Bish- 
op June  17,  1907,  by  Pres.  Joseph  F. 
Smith.  He  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
for  a  second  term  Sept.  28,  1913. 

KOHLER,  Jacob,  Bishop  of  the  Un- 
ion Ward,  Union  Stake,  Oregon,  from 
1919  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Jan.  7,  1869, 
in  Ruderswyl,  Canton  Bern,  Switzer- 
land, a  son  of  Jacob  Kohler  and  Anna 
Barbara  Schank.  He  was  baptized 
June  8,  1895,  ordained  an  Elder  June 
5,  1896,  by  Fred  Thener,  a  Seventy 
June  26,  1907,  by  George  E.  Stoddard, 
a  High  Priest  May  28,  1910,  by  Lehi 
Wright,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
ern States  in  1916-1919,  and  was  set 
apart  as  Bishop  Sept.  23,  1919. 

LYMAN,  George  Richard,  second 
counselor  in  the  Union  Stake  presi- 
dency, Oregon,  from  1928  to  1930,  was 
born  April  15,  1873,  in  Parowan,  Iron 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Oscar  Morris  Ly- 
man and  Phoebe  Medora  Benson.     He 


was  baptized  July  19,  1896,  ordained  a 
Seventy  April  17,  1900,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  a  High  Priest  March  12, 
1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  served  as 
Bishop  of  the  La  Grande  Ward,  from 
1922  to  1924,  and  of  the  La  Grande  1st 
Ward  from  1924  to  1925.  He  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  in  the  Union 
Stake  presidency  June  17,  1928. 

McBRIDE,  Reuben  Marion,  Bishop 
of  the  Imbler  Ward,  Union  Stake, 
Oregon,  from  1916  to  1925,  was  born 
May  12,  1864.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  28,  1913,  by  Lehi 
Wright,  and  sustained  as  Bishop 
March  12,  1916. 

PLATT,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Summerville  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Ore- 
gon, from  1903  to  1906,  was  born  Oct. 
9,  1869,  in  Pinto,  Washington  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Benjamin  Piatt  and 
Mary  Graves.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
9,  1877,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  in  1898-1901,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  7,  1903,  by  Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith. 

RAWSON,  William  John,  Bishop  of 
the  Nibley  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Ore- 
gon, from  1901  to  1906,  was  born  Aug. 
21,  1873,  in  Harrisville,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Archer  Morrison  Raw- 
son  and  Margaret  Angeline  Pace.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  4,  1881,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  9,  1901,  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley. 

RICHINS,  Osborne,  Bishop  of  the 
Union  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Oregon, 
from  1914  to  1919,  was  born  Nov.  5, 
1877,  at  Mud  Springs,  Kane  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Wellington  Richins  and  Alice 
Ida  Bond.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  30, 
1885,  ordained  a  Seventy  Dec.  9,  1897, 
by  George  Teasdale,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1897-1899,  and 
a  mission  to  the  Central  States  in 
1905-1907.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  April  27,  1912,  by  Franklin  S. 


656 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Bramwell,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  6,  1914, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

ROUNDY,  William  A.,  Bishop  of 
the  Baker  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Oregon, 
from  1919  to  1921,  was  born  Jan.  15, 
1885,  in  St.  David,  Arizona,  a  son  of 
Jared  C.  Roundy  and  Nellie  White. 
He  was  ordained  a  Seventy  July  15, 
1911,  by  Osborne  Richins,  and  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  June  24,  1919,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

SALISBURY,  Ellis  Davis,  Bishop 
of  the  Alicel  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Ore- 
gon, from  1901  to  1906,  was  born  Aug. 
4,  1851,  in  Flintshire,  Wales,  a  son  of 
Joshua  Salisbury  and  Martha  Davis. 
He  was  baptized  in  1860,  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1860,  filled  a  special  mission 
to  St.  Johns,  Arizona,  in  1884-1886, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  June  9,  1901,  by  Mathias  F. 
Cowley.     He   died   Feb.   20,   1915. 

STODDARD,      Alexander      Lester, 

Bishop  of  the  La  Grande  1st  Ward, 
Union  Stake,  Oregon,  from  1925  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  8,  1895,  in  Lo- 
gan, Utah,  a  son  of  George  Eckersley 
Stoddard  and  Ellen  Izatt.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  7,  1904,  ordained  an 
Elder  Jan.  31,  1914,  by  James  W. 
Eardley,  filled  a  mission  to  South  Af- 
rica in  1916-1920,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Sept.  27,  1925,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

WALE,  William  James,  Bishop  of 
the  Baker  Ward,  Union  Stake,  Oregon, 
from  1903  to  1919,  was  born  May  27, 
1853,  in  South  Petherton,  England,  a 
son  of  James  Wale  and  Mary  Ann 
England.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  September,  1898,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1899-1900,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  9,  1901, 
by  Mathias  F.  Cowley,  sustained  as 
Bishop  Feb.  15,  1903,  and  ordained  to 
that  office  March  1,  1903,  by  John 
Henry  Smith. 


Utah  5take 

ANDERSON,  Nephi,  Bishop  of  the 
Manavu  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, from 
1920  to  1930,  was  born  Nov.  3,  1872, 
in  Fountain  Green,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Rasmus  Andersen  and  Anne  K.  Niel- 
sen. He  was  baptized  June  6,  1883, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Western  States 
in  1904-1906,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  24,  1920,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

BOOTH,  Alfred  Lewis,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  4th  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1906  to  1924,  was  born  June  17, 
1864,  in  Alpine,  Utah,  a  son  of  Rich- 
ard T.  Booth  and  Elsie  Edge.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  3,  1872,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  9,  1900,  and  a  Bishop  Jan. 
13,  1907,  by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith. 

BULLOCK,  Benjamin  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Bonneville  Ward,  Utah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1913  to  1918,  was  born 
Oct.  27,  1878,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Benjamin  K.  Bullock  and  Martha 
A.  Hart.  He  was  baptized  July  16, 
1887,  filled  a  mission  to  Great  Britain 
in  1899-1902,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  27,  1913,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

CANNON,  Clawson  Young,  Bishop 
of  the  Provo  5th  Ward,  Utah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1929,  was  born 
Oct.  27,  1885,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Geo.  Q.  Cannon  and  Caroline 
Young.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  27,  1893, 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  J.  Golden  Kim- 
ball, filled  a  mission  to  the  Netherlands 
in  1905-1908,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  24,  1925,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 

CLAYTON,  Hugh,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  6th  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1902  to  1903,  was  born  Sept. 
15,  1871,  in  Preston,  Lancashire,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  William  Clayton  and 
Alice  Affleck.  He  was  baptized  March 
22,   1882,   and   was   ordained   a   High 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


657 


Priest  and  Bishop  April  30,  1902,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

DIXON,  Henry  Aldus,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  3rd  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1930,  was  born  June 
29,  1890,  in  Pi'ovo,  a  son  of  John 
DeGrey  Dixon  and  Sarah  Lewis.  He 
was  baptized  June  29,  1898,  ordained 
an  Elder  Sept.  11,  1910,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Germany  in  1910-1913,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  23,  1924,  by 
Rudger  Clawson. 

DURRANT,  Clarence  Henry,  Bishop 
of  the  Pioneer  Ward,  Utah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  23,  1904,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son 
of  John  H.  Durrant  and  Ida  Peay.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  16,  1913,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1924-1926,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  20,  1927,  by 
Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

FACER,  William  Orville,  Bishop  of 
the  Provo  5th  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec. 
3,  1884,  in  Willard,  Utah,  a  son  of 
William  J.  Facer  and  Caroline  Wil- 
liams. He  was  baptized  Dec.  17,  1892, 
ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  1,  1906,  by 
his  father,  filled  a  mission  to  Samoa  in 
1906-1910,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
March  10,  1928,  by  Reed  Smoot,  and 
a  Bishop  Dec.  1,  1929,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

GIBBY,  Richard  Stevenson,  Bishop 
of  the  Provo  3rd  Ward,  Utah  Stake, 
Utah,  fi-om  1891  to  1895,  was  born  Jan. 
6,  1867,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  William  Gibby  and  Catherine 
Stevenson.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  26, 
1877,  filled  a  mission  to  the  North- 
western States  in  1886-1888,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  May  17,  1891,  by 
Heber  J.  Grant. 

GILES,  John  Thomas,  Bishop  of  the 
Bonneville  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1921,  was  born  June  1, 

Vol.  IV,  No.  42 


1865,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
and  Elizabeth  Giles.  He  was  baptized 
in  August,  1873,  filled  a  mission  to 
Hawaii  in  1890-1893  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Jan.  7,  1894,  by  David 
John. 

HARDING,  Alfred  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Pioneer  Ward,  Utah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1913  to  1927,  was  born 
Feb.  14,  1863,  in  Kingswood,  Glouces- 
tershire, England,  a  son  of  Edward  G. 
Harding  and  Sarah  Ann  Meeks.  He 
came  to  Utah  in  1874,  was  baptized 
July  20,  1879,  filled  a  mission  to  Sa- 
moa in  1889-1894,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  June  9,  1895,  by  David  John, 
and  a  Bishop  April  27,  1913,  by  Da- 
vid 0.  McKay. 

JACOB,  Isaac,  Bishop  of  the  Bon- 
neville Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1923  to  1925,  was  born  May  11,  1876, 
in  Midway,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Jacob  and  Ellen  Gerber.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  12,  1885,  filled  a  mission  to 
England  in  1908-1910,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  July  30,  1911,  by  Charles 
W.  Penrose,  and  a  Bishop  Oct,  13, 
1923,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

JENSEN,  James  Marinus,  Bishop  of 
the  Manavu  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
in  1930 -I- .  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p. 
34.) 

JOHNSON,  Brigham,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  6th  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1916  to  1919,  was  born  Dec.  10, 
1867,  in  Provo,  a  son  of  J.  P.  R.  John- 
son and  Mary  Paulsen.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  24,  1876,  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  Hawaii  in  1889,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  20,  1902, 
by  Rudger  Clawson  and  a  Bishop  Oct. 
29,  1916,  by  Hyrum  M.  Smith. 

JONES,  Thatcher  C,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  3rd  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1919  to  1921,  was  born  Sept. 
29,  1888,  in  Lehi,  Utah,  a  son  of  Ed- 
ward E.  Jones  and  Letitia  Wheatley. 

October  17,  1936 


658 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


He  was  baptized  Dec.  3,  1896,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1910-1912, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  25, 
1920,   by   Richard   R.    Lyman. 

KNUDSEN,  Benjamin  Henry,  Bish- 
of  the  Provo  2n(l  Ward,  Utah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Dec.  11,  1887,  in  Provo,  a  son  of  Her- 
man Knudsen  and  Bertha  K.  A.  Evert. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  29,  1896,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Swiss-German  Mis- 
sion in  1914-1916,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Oct.  26,  1919,  by  Jos.  B. 
Keeler,  and  a  Bishop  Sept.  14,  1930, 
by  Reed  Smoot. 

LOVELESS,    James    Washington, 

Bishop  of  the  Provo  2nd  Ward,  Utah 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1876  to  1889,  was 
born  Dec.  23,  1828,  at  Perry,  Fairfield 
Co.,  Ohio,  the  son  of  John  Loveless 
and  Mahala  Anderson.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  August,  1839,  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  20,  1876,  and  died  in  Provo, 
Utah,  May  7,  1889. 

MABEY,  Albert,  jun.,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  5th  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1920  to  1924,  was  born  Feb.  4, 
1878,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of  Al- 
bert Mabey  and  Celestia  Janet  Wood. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
ordained  a  Seventy  by  John  Henry 
Smith,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1898-1900,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Dec.  9,  1917,  by  Jos.  B. 
Keeler,  and  a  Bishop  April  24,  1920, 
by  Rudger  Clawson. 

McADAM,  John  Wright,  Bishop  of 
the  Provo  6th  Ward,  Utah  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930+ ,  was  born 
Oct.  31,  1870,  in  Whitehaven,  Cumber- 
land, England,  a  son  of  Thomas  Mc- 
Adam  and  Mai-garet  Wright.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1S82,  was  baptized 
that  same  year,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
in  1912,  and  a  Bishop  Jan.  4,  1925. 

MURDOCH,  Royal  Joseph,  Bishop 
of  the  Provo  4th   Ward,  Utah  Stake, 


Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 -f,  was  born 
April  19,  1885,  in  Charleston,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Joseph  R.  Murdock  and  Mar- 
garet Wright.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
15,  1893,  ordained  a  Seventy  July  21, 
1907,  by  B.  H.  Roberts,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1908-1909, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  19, 
1924,  by  John  Swenson,  and  a  Bishop 
Nov.  23,  1924,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

NELSON,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  6th  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1919  to  1925,  was  born  Jan.  24, 
1876,  in  Mantua,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jo- 
hannes Nielsen  and  Ann  Petersen.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  29,  1916,  by 
Jos.  B.  Keeler,  and  a  Bishop  April  27, 
1919,  by  Reed  Smoot. 

NELSON,  Lars  L.,  Bi?';op  oi  the 
Provo  2nd  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1902  to  1929,  was  born  Oct.  1, 
1864,  in  Provo,  Utah,  a  son  of  Lars  P. 
Nelson  and  Mary  M.  Lofvendahl.  He 
was  baptized  Nov.  3,  1872,  filled  a 
mission  to  Sweden  in  1890-1892,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
April  20,  1902,  by  Reed  Smoot.  He 
died  Sept.  15,  1933,  in  Provo. 

POULTON,  Ralph,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  6th  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1903  to  1916,  was  born  Oct.  23, 
1872,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  James  Poulton  and  Caroline  Harris. 
He  was  baptized  in  1880,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  20,  1902,  by  Jos.  B. 
Keeler,  and  a  Bishop  April  19,  1903, 
by  Reed  Smoot. 

TANNER,  Myron,  Bishop  of  the 
Provo  3rd  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1864  to  1891,  was  born  Jan.  4, 
1826,  in  Bolton,  Warren  Co.,  N.  Y.,  a 
son  of  John  Tanner  and  Elizabeth  Bes- 
wick.  He  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
Oct.  25,  1864.     He  died  Jan.  11,  1903. 

WALL,  William  Madison,  Bishop  of 
the    Provo    4th    Ward,    Utah    Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


659 


Utah,  from  1852  to  1854,  was  born 
Sept.  30,  1821,  in  Rottenham  County, 
North  Carolina,  the  son  of  Isaac  and 
Nancy  Wall.  He  was  baptized  in  May, 
1842,  assisted  in  organizing  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion,  and  came  to  Utah  in 
1850.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Aug. 
22,  1852,  by  Isaac  Higbee,  and  died 
Sept.  18,  1869,  in  Provo,  Utah. 

WHITEHEAD,   Walter   Paxman, 

Bishop  of  the  Provo  1st  Ward,  Utah 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Feb.  28,  1876,  in  Grays,  Kent, 
England,  a  son  of  Walter  Whitehead 
and  Sarah  Allsworth.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  12,  1885,  emigrated  to  Utah 
in  1888,  filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1908-1909,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  27,  1913,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith, 
and  a  Bishop  in  1926. 

WRIDE,  Evan,  Bishop  of  the  Provo 
2nd  Ward,  Utah  Stake,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  from  1889  to  1898,  was  born 
Feb.  17,  1843,  in  Lanishen  Parish, 
Glamorganshire,  South  Wales,  a  son 
of  Thomas  Wride  and  Ann  James.  He 
was  baptized  in  1868,  emigrated  to 
Utah  that  same  year,  filled  a  mission 
to  Wales  in  1879-1880,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Nov.  28,  1880,  and  a 
Bishop  June  2,  1889,  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards.    He  died  Aug.  2,  1920. 


Wasatch  Stake 


BRIM,  Alonzo  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
Center  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake,  Wa- 
satch Co.,  Utah,  from  1898  to  1900, 
was  born  March  10,  1853,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Alfred  W.  Brim 
and  Mary  Ann  Merrill.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Sandwich  Islands  in 
1883-1886,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  5,  1894,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  ordained  as  Bishop  of  the  Center 
Ward  Nov.  12,  1898,  by  the  same 
Apostle.     He  died  Jan.  4,  1925. 

BROADBENT,  David  Albert,  presi- 
dent of  the  Wasatch  Stake,  Wasa+ch 


Co.,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  May  14,  1871,  at  Goshen,  Utah 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  Broadbent 
and  Mary  Jane  Nuttall.  He  was  bap- 
tized Aug.  7,  1879,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Jan.  5,  1898,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1898-1900,  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Nov.  7,  1904,  by  George  Albert 
Smith,  and  chosen  as  president  of  the 
Wasatch  Stake  March  11,  1928. 

BRONSON,  Clark,  Bishop  of  the 
Midway  1st  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake, 
Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1926  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  April  21,  1885,  at 
Midway,  Utah,  a  son  of  Everice  Bron- 
son  and  Cynthia  Van  Wagoner.  He 
was  baptized  in  March,  1893,  ordained 
a  Seventy  Nov.  16,  1919,  by  Brigham 
H.  Roberts,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1920-1922,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Nov.  28,  1926,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

CARLILE,  Frederick  Giles,  Bishop 
of  the  Heber  2nd  Ward,  Wasatch 
Stake,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1928 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  17,  1887,  at 
Heber,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Carlile 
and  Sarah  Elizabeth  Crook.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  16,  1896,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northwestern  States  in 
1911-1914,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  27,  1919,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins, 
and  a  Bishop  April  7,  1928,  by  Stephen 
L.  Richards. 

CLEGG,  Henry,  Bishop  of  the  He- 
ber West  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake,  Wa- 
satch Co.,  Utah,  from  1884  to  1894, 
was  born  June  7,  1825,  in  Preston, 
England.  He  was  baptized  in  1837, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  Nov.  2,  1884, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman.  He  died  Aug. 
30,  1894. 

CROOK,  Frederick,  Bishop  of  the 
Heber  3rd  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake,  Wa- 
satch Co.,  Utah,  from  1903  to  1930,  was 
born  Aug.  17,  1869,  at  Heber,  Utah, 
a  son  of  John  Crook  and  Mary  Giles. 


660 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


He  was  baptized  Aug.  22,  1881,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Feb.  7,  1900,  by  Sey- 
mour B.  Young,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States  in  1900-1902,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Feb.  8,  1903,  by  Mathias  F.  Cowley. 

CUMMINGS,  Henry  Clay,  first 
counselor  in  the  Wasatch  Stake  presi- 
dency, Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1928 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  11,  1894,  in 
Heber,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Elisha  Jones  Cummings  and  Hannah 
Mary  Clegg.  He  was  baptized  June 
6,  1903,  ordained  an  Elder  March  9, 
1914,  by  David  A.  Broadbent,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1914-1916,  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Nov.  23,  1919,  by  Brigham  H.  Roberts, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States 
in  1925-1926,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Nov.  28,  1926,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman.  He  presided  as 
Bishop  over  the  Heber  2nd  Ward  in 
1926-1928. 

FRANCOM,  Joseph  William,  Bishop 
of  the  Midway  1st  Ward,  Wasatch 
Stake,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1903 
to  1906,  was  born  Oct.  7,  1869,  at  Pay- 
son,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Francom  and  Martha  Heaton.  He  was 
baptized  June  8,  1880,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  July  15,  1900,  by  Francis  M. 
Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  Feb.  8,  1903, 
by  Mathias  F.  Cowley. 

FULLMER,     William     Price,     jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Wallsburg  Ward,  Wa- 
satch Stake,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1912  to  1916,  was  born  Nov.  10,  1871, 
in  Springville,  Utah,  a  son  of  William 
Price  Fullmer  and  Maria  Jane  Curtis. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  15,  1879,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Feb.  3,  1905,  by  J. 
Golden  Kimball,  filled  a  mission  to 
Tennessee  in  1910-1911,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan. 
28,   1912,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 


Stake,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1916 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  4,  1872,  at 
Wallsbui'g,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles 
Gardner  and  Susannah  Rigby.  He 
was  baptized  June  27,  1880,  ordained  a 
Seventy  July  21,  1907,  by  John  C. 
Greer,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Northern 
States  in  1910-1912,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  March  26, 
1916,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

GARFF,  George  Peter,  Bishop  of 
the  Wallsburg  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake, 
Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1903  to  1912, 
was  born  June  17,  1870,  at  South  Jor- 
dan (now  Riverton),  Salt  Lake  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Peter  N.  Garflf  and  An- 
tomina  Sorensen.  He  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  May  23,  1896,  by  Edward 
Stevenson,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Sandwich  Islands  in  1896-1899,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
May  11,  1903,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

GILES,  Thomas  Huskinson,  first 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Wasatch  Stake,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah, 
from  1877  to  1901,  was  born  Aug.  6, 
1821,  at  East  Bridgeford,  Nottingham- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  William  Giles 
and  Sarah  Huskinson.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1849  in  England,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  sustained  as  first 
counselor  in  the  Wasatch  Stake  presi- 
decy  July  15,  1877,  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards.     He  died  June  4,  1903. 

HATCH,  Henry  Ray,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Wasatch 
Stake,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1917 
to  1919,  was  born  April  20,  1886,  at 
Ashley,  Uintah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Abram  C.  Hatch  and  Maria  H.  Luke. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  28,  1909,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Oct.  24,  1915.  by 
Heber  J.  Grant,  and  set  apart  as  sec- 
ond counselor  in  the  stake  presidency 
Sept.  27,  1917,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 


GARDNER,  George  Albert,  Bishop 
of     the     Wallsburg     Ward,     Wasatch 


LINDSAY,   Bennett,  Bishop  of  the 
Center   Ward,    Wasatch   Stake,    Wa- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


661 


satch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1917  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Oct.  23,  1882,  at  Center, 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  Lindsay  and 
Agnes  Watson.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
11,  1906,  ordained  an  Elder  Oct.  13, 
1907,  by  Charles  Jensen,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Central  States  in  1911- 
1913,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
22,  1915,  by  Edward  D.  Clyde,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  July  29,  1917,  bj' 
James  E.  Talmage. 

McDonald,  Joseph  C,  Bishop  of 
the  Daniels  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake, 
Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1929, 
was  born  Oct.  8,  1866,  at  Heber,  Wa- 
satch Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  S. 
McDonald  and  Nancy  E.  Cummings. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  27,  1876,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  10,  1903, 
by  William  H.  Smart,  and  a  Bishop 
July  30,  1916,  by  George  A.  Smith. 

NUTTALL,  William  E.,  Bishop  of 
the  Provo  3rd  Ward,  Utah,  from  1862 
to  1864,  and  Bishop  of  the  Wallsburg 
Ward,  Wasatch  Stake,  Wasatch  Co., 
Utah,  from  1877  to  1886,  was  born  Oct. 
29,  1826,  in  Carlisle,  Cumberland, 
England,  a  son  of  William  Nuttall  and 
Mary  Langhorn.  He  was  set  apart  to 
preside  over  the  Wallsburg  Ward  July 
15,  1877,  by  Franklin  D.  Richards. 

OLPIN,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the  He- 
ber 1st  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake,  Wa- 
satch Co.,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  24,  1897,  at  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Edwin  Dee 
Olpin  and  Inez  Robison.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1905,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1916-1918,  was  or- 
daned  a  High  Priest  April  24,  1927, 
by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  in  1927,  and  set  apart  to  pre- 
side over  the  Pleasant  Grove  1st  Ward 
by  the  same  Apostle.  He  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  in  the  Tim- 
panogos  Stake  presidency  July  1,  1928, 
by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  set  apart 
as  Bishop  of  the  Heber  1st  Ward  Sept. 
7,  1930,  by  David  0.  McKay. 


ORGILL,  Joseph  Alvin,  Bishop  of 
the  Daniels  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake, 
Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1929  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  March  19,  1880,  at 
Wellington,  Millard  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Mark  Orgill  and  Rachel  I.  Smith. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  14,  1889,  or- 
dained an  Elder  Dec.  7,  1902,  by  Pat- 
rick H.  McGuire,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Northern  States  in  1909-1911,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  30,  1916, 
by  Joseph  R.  Murdock,  filled  another 
mission  to  the  Northern  States  in 
1928-1929,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
May  26,  1929,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

RYAN,  George  Franklin,  2nd  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Wa- 
satch Stake,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from 
1923  to  1928,  was  born  Dec.  7,  1880, 
in  Heber,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  M. 
Ryan  and  Flowerette  M.  Fraughton. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  24,  1889,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Jan.  28,  1917,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  acted  as  Bishop 
of  the  Heber  1st  Ward  from  1917  to 
1923,  and  was  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  in  the  stake  presidency  Jan. 
21,  1923,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

STANLEY,  George  Burton,  Bishop 

of  the  Heber  1st  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake, 
Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1930, 
was  born  Aug.  29,  1899,  at  Park  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Geoi'ge  Franklin  Stan- 
ley and  Harriet  Hales.  He  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  1,  1907,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  29,  1922,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
15,  1923,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun. 

VAN  WAGENER,  David,  Bishop  of 
the  Midway  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake, 
Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1892, 
was  born  July  18,  1836,  in  Wynocke, 
Hudson  (now  Pasaic)  Co.,  New  Jer- 
sey, a  son  of  John  H.  Van  Wagener 
and  Eliza  Smith.  He  was  baptized  at 
Winter  Quarters  in  June,  1847,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July 
15,  1877,  by  John  Taylor. 


662 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


VAN  WAGONER,  John,  jun..  Bish- 
op of  the  Midway  1st  Ward,  Wasatch 
Stake,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  from  1913 
to  1926,  was  born  Dec.  16,  1873,  at 
Midway,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Van 
Wagoner  and  Margaret  Ann  Fawcett. 
He  was  baptized  July  15,  1883,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Jan.  26,  1912, 
by  Joseph  R.  Murdock,  and  chosen 
Bishop  of  the  Midway  1st  Ward  Oct. 
26,  1913. 

WATKINS,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
Midway  Ward,  Wasatch  Stake,  Wa- 
satch Co.,  Utah,  from  1892  to  1902, 
was  born  April  13,  1834,  at  Kent,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  Thomas  John  Edward 
Watkins  and  Sarah  Jordan.  He  was 
baptized  in  1852,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  30,  1872,  by  John  Jor- 
dan. He  died  Dec.  23,  1902,  in  Midway. 


Wayne  Stake 


ALBRECHT,  Earl  LeRoy,  Bishop 
of  the  Fremont  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
May  13,  1890,  in  Fremont,  a  son  of 
John  Albrecht  and  Chasty  Harris.  He 
was  baptized  June  5,  1898,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Aug.  8,  1926,  by  Rich- 
ard  R.   Lyman. 

BAGLEY,  Ellis  Lynn,  Bishop  of  the 
Loa  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah,  in 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  20,  1898,  in 
Koosharem,  Utah,  a  son  of  Edward 
Carroll  Bagley  and  Pauline  Martin- 
sen.  He  was  baptized  July  7,  1907, 
ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  10,  1922,  by 
his  father,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Western  States  in  1922-1925,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Feb.  9,  1930, 
by  Geo.  W.  Okerlund,  and  a  Bishop 
July  6,   1930,  by  Jos.   F.   Smith,  jun. 

BRINKERHOFF,  George  Cutler, 

Bishop  of  the  Thurber  Ward,  Wayne 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1928,  was 
born  Feb.  21,  1887,  in  Thurber,  a  son 
of  George  Brinkerhoff  and  Ida  Estella 


Cutler.  He  was  baptized  May  2,  1895, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Feb.  9,  1908,  by 
Charles  H.  Hart,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Eastern  States  in  1912-1914,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op March  23,  1924,  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards. 

BUSENBARK,  Leland  J.,  Bishop  of 
the  Torrey  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  May 
10,  1898,  in  Fairview,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  Busenbark  and  Dora  Dreyor.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  5,  1906,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  21,  1927,  by  Ste- 
phen L.  Richards,  and  a  Bishop  July 
6,  1930,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

CAMERON,   Jonathan   William, 

Bishop  of  the  Torrey  Ward,  Wayne 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1906  to  1909,  was 
born  Aug.  6,  1874,  in  Panguitch,  "Utah, 
a  son  of  Jonathan  Cameron  and  Fran- 
ces Louisa  Cooper.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  5,  1882,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
May  13,  1906,  by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

CHAPPELL,  George  Armstrong, 

Bishop  of  the  Lyman  Ward,  Wayne 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1909  to  1911,  is  a 
son  of  George  Chappell  and  Maria 
Dudson.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
May  9,  1909,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

COLEMAN,  George  Smith,  Bishop 
of  the  Teasdale  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1900  to  1903,  was  born 
May  20,  1866,  in  Smithfield,  Utah,  a 
son  of  George  Coleman  and  Jane 
Smith.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  New  Zea- 
land in  1896-1899,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  May  6,  1900, 
by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

COOK,  Joshua  Holden,  Bishop  of 
the  Lyman  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1900  to  1909,  was  born  May  16, 
1857,  in  Nephi,  Utah,  a  son  of  David 
Cook  and  Mary  Ann  Holden.  He  was 
baptized  when  eight  years  old,  filled  a 
mission    to    the    Northern    States    in 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


663 


1893-1895,  and  was  sustained  as  Bish- 
op Aug.   11,  1900. 

ECKERSLEY,   George   Teasdale, 

second  counselor  in  the  Wayne  Stake 
presidency,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  6,  1895,  in  Loa,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Joseph  Eckersley  and  Sarah 
Ellen  Wilkenson.  He  was  baptized 
June  7,  1903,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  23,  1924,  by  Stephen  L. 
Richards. 

ELLETT,  Joseph  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Qiles  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1907  to  1910,  was  born  June  20, 
1872,  in  Holden  Utah,  a  son  of  John 
J.  Ellett  and  Mary  Turner.  He  was 
baptized  in  September,  1880,  filled  a 
mission  to  Montana  in  1898-1899,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op May  7,  1907,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

FORSYTH,  Neil,  Bishop  of  the 
Teasdale  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah, 
in  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov.  11,  1881,  in 
Thurber,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  Rob- 
ert Forsyth  and  Fredonia  M.  Gohene. 
He  was  baptized  June  4,  1896,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Nov.  4,  1926,  by 
Joseph  F.  Smith,  jun.,  and  was  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  Jan.  12,  1930. 

GRANT,  James,  Bishop  of  the 
Thurber  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1900  to  1901,  was  born  Nov.  30, 
1857,  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah,  a  son  of 
David  Grant  and  Elizabeth  Williams. 
He  was  baptized  June  16,  1867,  and 
was  sustained  as  Bishop  Aug.  12, 
1900. 

HANSEN,  Michael,  Bishop  of  the 
Loa  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1916  to  1918,  was  born  July  7,  1849, 
in  Bjerre,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Hans 
Dennesen  and  Kjerstine  Mikkelsdat- 
ter.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  15,  1881, 
came  to  Utah  in  1885,  was  ordained 
an  Elder  April  27,  1884,  by  John  B. 
Hesse,  filled  a  mission  to  Denmark  in 
1910-1912,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 


Aug.  27,  1893,  by  Marriner  W.  Mer- 
rill, and  a  Bishop  May  14,  1916,  by 
Francis  M.  Lyman. 

HUNT,  George  Mathew,  Bishop  of 
the  Thurber  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  4,  1886,  in  Monroe,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Moroni  Hunt  and  Emily  Casto.  He 
was  baptized  July  31,  1899,  filled  at 
mission  to  Germany  in  1910-1912,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op April  22,  1928,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

IVIE,  Jacob  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Loa  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1927  to  1930,  was  born  May  2,  1883, 
in  Loa,  a  son  of  Jacob  Ivie  and  Lydia 
Okerlund.  He  was  baptized  May  2, 
1891,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  May  8,  1927,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

JORGENSEN,  J  o  r  g  e  n,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Thurber  Ward,  Wayne 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1880  to  1882,  was 
born  May  26,  1849,  in  Tolsager,  near 
Nykjobing,  Holbak  amt,  Denmark,  a 
son  of  Christian  Jorgensen  and  So- 
phia Olderich.  He  was  baptized  in 
1857,  emigrated  to  Utah  and  was  ap- 
pointed presiding  Elder  in  Thurber 
Ward  in  1880.    He  died  April  20,  1894. 

LAZENBY,  Moroni,  second  counsel- 
or in  the  Wayne  Stake  presidency, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1916,  was  born 
Jan.  12,  1872,  in  Minersville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  T.  Lazenby  and  Annie 
Tether.  He  was  baptized  in  April, 
1882,  ordained  a  Seventy  in  1894,  by 
Walter  H.  Jeffries,  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Australia  in  1894-1897.  He 
was  sustained  as  second  counselor 
Dec.  30,  1911. 

MEEKS,  Robert  Arthur,  Bishop  of 
the  Thurber  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1912  to  1924,  was  born 
April  2,  1878,  in  Pine  Valley,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  Meeks  and  Sarah 
Gardner.     He   was   baptized   June   6, 


664 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


1886,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  20, 
1911,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  a 
Bishop  Oct.  22,  1912,  by  James  E.  Tal- 
mage. 

OLDROYD,  Willis  Andrew,  Bishop 
of  the  Lyman  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  18,  1899,  in  Lyman,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Archibald  Oldroyd  and  Theda  Jane 
Buchanan.  He  was  baptized  July  5, 
1908,  ordained  a  High  Priest  March 
23,  1924,  by  Joseph  Eckersley,  and  a 
Bishop  May  3,  1925,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman. 

RYMER,  Sidney  Childers,  Bishop  of 
the  Torrey  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1927  to  1929,  was  born  Feb.  24, 
1885,  in  Troup,  Smith  Co.,  Texas,  the 
son  of  George  L.  Rymer  and  Elizabeth 
C.  Taylor.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  21,  1927,  by 
Stephen  L,  Richards. 

SIDWELL,  George  W.,  Bishop  of 
the  Thurber  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1910  to  1912,  was  born 
April  23,  1876,  in  Manti,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Geo.  W.  Sidwell  and  Adelia  Cox. 
He  was  baptized  Jan.  4,  1902,  filled 
a  mission  to  California  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  April 
20,  1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

TAYLOR,  Lorenzo  Jedediah,  Bishop 
of  the  Loa  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1927,  was  born  April  30, 
1881,  in  Harmony,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wm. 
Riley  Taylor  and  Margaret  Jane  Elli- 
son. He  was  baptized  Aug.  6,  1891, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Aug.  6,  1901,  by 
John  Henry  Smith,  filled  a  mission  to 
England  in  1901-1903,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  May  5,  1918,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney,  and  a  Bishop  March  23,  1924, 
by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

TAYLOR,  James  Calvin,  Bishop  of 
the  Fremont  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1919  to  1922,  was  born 
Oct.  28,  1890,  in  Fort  Apache,  Arizona, 


a  son  of  William  A.  Taylor  and  Delia 
E.  Ivie.  He  was  baptized  March  5, 
1899,  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  30,  1915, 
by  Joseph  Eckersley,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northwestern  States  in  1916- 
1918,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Aug.  2,  1919,  by  Richard 
R.  Lyman. 

TAYLOR,  Robert  Allen,  Bishop  of 
the  Fremont  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1922  to  1926,  was  born 
April  19,  1888,  in  Fremont,  Utah,  a 
son  of  James  Allen  Taylor  and  Louise 
J.  Taylor.  He  was  baptized  June  4, 
1896,  ordained  an  Elder  Dec.  4,  1910, 
by  Chr.  T.  Balle,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States  in  1912-1914,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  5,  1917, 
by  Geo.  A.  Smith,  and  a  Bishop  Feb. 
21,  1922,  by  John  A.  Widtsoe. 

WEBSTER,  William  Fredrick,  pres- 
ident of  the  Wayne  Stake,  Utah,  from 
1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  3,  1881, 
in  Loa,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  M. 
Webster  and  Margaret  Mathews.  He 
was  baptized  July  2,  1892,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northwestei-n  States  ii 
1912-1914,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
May  14,  1916,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman, 
and  acted  as  fii'st  counselor  in  the 
stake  presidency  from  1924  to  1926 
(Aug.  8),  when  he  was  set  apart  as 
president  by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

WHITE,  Levi  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Giles  Ward,  Wayne  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1896  to  1907,  was  born  March  5, 
1868,  in  St.  Joseph,  Nevada,  a  son  of 
John  C.  White  and  Mary  Ann  Ingram. 
He  was  baptized  in  1887,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  May  31,  1896. 

WILLIAMS,  Gustavus,  Bishop  of 
the  Teasdale  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930,  was  born 
Feb.  3,  1880,  in  Escalante,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Sylvester  Williams  and  Mary  Cole- 
man. He  was  baptized  April  1,  1889, 
ordained  a  High  Priest  May  9,  1915, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


665 


by  David  0.  McKay,  and  a  Bishop  Aug. 
15,  1926,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

WILSON,  Heber  James,  Bishop  of 
the  Teasdale  Ward,  Wayne  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1903  to  1907,  was  born 
Aug.  28,  1860,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Robert  Wilson  and  Mary  Ann 
Baldwin.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  England 
in  1897-1898,  and  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Feb.  2,  1903,  by  Abraham  0.  Wood- 
ruff. 


Weber  Stake 


BEUS,  James  Richard,  Bishop  of 
the  Hooper  Ward,  Weber  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1913  to  1923,  was  born  April  5, 
1869,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of  James 
Beus  and  Clarinda  C.  Hill.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  July  13,  1913. 

BROWN,  Moroni  Franklin,  Bishop 
of  the  Ogden  1st  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1890  to  1897,  was  born 
Sept.  23,  1857,  in  Fort  Supply,  Wyo., 
a  son  of  James  M.  Brown  and  Ade- 
laide Exervia.  He  was  baptized  Oct. 
4,  1866,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Feb.  2,  1890,  by  Franklin 
D.  Richards.  He  died  Sept.  18,  1897, 
in  San  Diego,  Calif. 

CHILD,  John,  Bishop  of  the  Clinton 
Ward,  Weber  Stake,  Utah,  from  1925 
to  1930,  was  born  Sept.  24,  1881,  in 
Riverdale,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  C. 
Child  and  Margaret  Patterson.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  24,  1889,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  Aug.  27,  1916,  by  Lewis 
W.  Shurtliff,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
April   12,   1925,  by   Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

CRITCHLOW,  Benjamin  Chamber- 
lain, Bishop  of  the  Ogden  1st  Ward, 
Weber  Stake,  Utah,  from  1878  to  1890, 
was  born  Dec.  20,  1835,  in  Leechburg, 
Penn.,  a  son  of  William  Critchlow  and 
Harriet  Hawkins.  He  was  baptized  in 
1845,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 


Bishop  Dec.  22,  1878,  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards.  He  died  at  Hyrum,  Utah, 
Aug.  31,  1924. 

GARNER,  Horace  Eugene,  Bishop 
of  the  Ogden  1st  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  29,  1876,  in  Ogden,  a  son  of 
Frederick  Garner  and  Ann  Horrocks. 
He  was  baptized  Nov.  6,  1885,  ordained 
a  Seventy  April  10,  1899,  by  John 
Henry  Smith,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  in  1899-1901,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  13,  1908, 
and  a  Bishop  Oct.  28,  1923,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith,  jun. 

GREEN,  Edward  Saxe,  Bishop  of 
the  Kanesville  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Nov.  26,  1872,  in  West  Weber,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Ammon  Green  and  Almira 
Mesick.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  4, 
1881,  ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  17, 
1897,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1897- 
1900,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
1,  1902,  by  Charles  F.  Middleton,  and  a 
Bishop  July  15,  1923,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith, 
jun. 

GREEN,  George,  Bishop  of  the 
Kanesville  Ward,  Weber  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1908  to  1923,  was  born  April  22, 
1865,  in  West  Weber,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Ammon  Green  and  Almira  Mesick. 
He  was  baptized  in  1874,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  9,  1895,  by  Lewis 
W.  Shurtliff,  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  1, 
1908,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

HADLOCK,  Orlando  Durham,  Bish- 
op of  the  Clinton  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1896  to  1915,  was  born 
May  15,  1863,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Hathron  Chauncey  Hadlock  and 
Eliza  Jane  Bowen.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  9,  1873,  ordained  an  Elder  May 
5,  1887,  by  Robert  McQuarrie,  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in 
1915,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  5,  1896,  by  Geo.  Q. 
Cannon. 


666 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


HAMMON,  Amasa  Marion,  Bishop 
of  the  Roy  Ward,  Weber  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept. 
24,  1884,  in  South  Hooper,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Levi  Baron  Hammon  and  Martha 
Jane  Belnap.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 
1,  1892,  ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  19, 
1905,  by  Nils  C.  Flygare,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1906- 
1908,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Jan.  11,  1925,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

JACOBS,  Murray  Kimball,  Bishop 
of  the  Riverdale  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1923  to  1930,  was  born 
Sept.  3,  1880,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Henry  C.  Jacobs  and  Susan 
Stringham.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  5, 
1889,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  24, 
1904,  by  Thos.  Hull,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Eastern  States  in  1904-1906, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  12, 
1915,  by  Alva  L.  Scoville,  and  or- 
dained a  Bishop  July  15,  1923,  by  Jos. 
F.  Smith,  jun. 

MITCHELL,  Frederick  Ervin,  Bish- 
op of  the  Clinton  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1915  to  1925,  was  born 
Aug.  17,  1881,  in  Riverdale,  Utah,  a 
son  of  James  Mitchell  and  Maren  Jen- 
sen. He  was  baptized  Oct.  24,  1889, 
ordained  a  Seventy  March  11,  1900, 
by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  filled  a  mission 
to  Scandinavia  in  1902-1904,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Dec.  25,  1910, 
by  Charles  F.  Middleton,  and  a  Bishop 
March  2,  1915,  by  Pres.  Jos.  F.  Smith. 

MURPHY,  Castle  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Ogden  2nd  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930,  was  born  Oct. 

I,  1886,  in  Ogden,  a  son  of  Emanuel 
Mark  Murphy  and  Eliza  Miranda 
Hadlock.  He  was  baptized  July  5, 
1896,  ordained  an  Elder  June  14,  1909, 
by  Robert  McQuarrie  and  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Hawaii  in  1909-1913,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  22,  1915, 
by  John   Watson,  and   a   Bishop  Jan. 

II,  1928,  by  Rudger  Clawson.    He  was 


set  apart  for  a  second  mission  Aug.  19, 
1930,  to  preside  over  the  Hawaiian 
Mission. 

PINCOCK,  Richard  Douglas,  Bish- 
op of  the  Ogden  2nd  Ward,  Weber 
Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  14,  1876,  in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son 
of  John  Pincock  and  Isabella  Douglas. 
He  was  baptized  June  29,  1884,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Jan.  6,  1928,  by 
Rudger  Clawson,  and  a  Bishop  July 
20,  1930,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

READ,  Thomas  William,  Bishop  of 
the  Hooper  Ward,  Weber  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1923  to  1925,  was  born  Feb.  28, 
1883,  in  Hooper,  the  son  of  Thomas  R. 
Read  and  Martha  E.  Hardy.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  6,  1891,  filled  a  mission 
to  California  in  1902-1904,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  July  15,  1923,  by 
Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

SCOVILLE,  Alva  LeRoy,  second 
counselor  in  the  Weber  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1915  to  1920,  was 
born  June  5,  1880,  in  Ogden,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Horatio  B.  Scoville  and  Maria 
Goodale.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  6, 
1888,  ordained  a  Seventy  April  20, 
1898,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  filled  a 
mission  to  Germany  in  1898-1901,  and 
was  set  apart  as  second  counselor  in 
the  Weber  Stake  presidency  Aug.  30, 
1915. 

STUART,  David  Calvin,  Bishop  of 
the  Ogden  19th  Ward,  Weber  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930,  was  born 
May  25,  1873,  in  Wardboro,  Bear  Lake 
Co.,  Idaho,  the  son  of  David  Crockett 
Stuart  and  Parthena  L.  Gunnison.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old, 
ordained  an  Elder  Sept.  28,  1894,  by 
Wm.  Budge,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  1914-1916,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Aug.  1,  1926,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

WATSON,  John,  second  counselor 
in  the  Weber  Stake  presidency,  Utah, 


i 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


667 


from  1908  to  1915  and  first  counselor 
from  1915  to  1922,  was  born  April  19, 
1853,  in  Walkington,  Yorkshire,  Eng- 
land, the  son  of  William  Watson  and 
Mary  Binnington.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  4,  1877,  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1881,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug. 
1,  1892,  by  Charles  F.  Middleton,  pre- 
sided over  the  Ogden  5th  Ward  from 
1900  to  1908,  and  died  March  15,  1935. 


West  Jordan  Stake 

BECKSTEAD,  Byram  Henry,  Bish- 
op of  the  South  Jordan  Ward,  West 
Jordan  Stake,  Utah,  in  1930 +  ,  was 
born  April  5,  1870,  in  South  Jordan, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Henry  Byram  Beck- 
stead  and  Catherine  Marie  Egbert.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  28,  1878,  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  1892  by  Edward  D.  Holt, 
filled  a  mission  to  Canada  in  1893- 
1896,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  July 
19,  1903,  by  Reed  Smoot,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Aug.  11,  1930,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

BILLS,  David,  Bishop  of  the  River- 
ton  Ward,  West  Jordan  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1921  to  1927,  was  born  April  13, 
1873,  in  South  Jordan,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  A.  Bills  and  Emmeline 
Beckstead.  He  was  baptized  when 
about  eight  years  old,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Aug.  14,  1921, 
by   George   F.   Richards. 

BILLS,  William  A.,  Bishop  of  the 
South  Jordan  Ward,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1877  to  1900,  was 
born  Aug.  5,  1835,  in  Pittsburg,  Penn- 
sylvania. He  emigrated  to  Utah  in 
1848,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  June  17,  1877,  by  Daniel 
H.  Wells. 

CRANE,  Franklin  Thomas,  Bishop 
of  the  Herriman  Ward,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1916  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Feb.  3,  1875,  in  Herriman,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  James  Crane 


and  Elizabeth  Stewart.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  old,  ordained 
an  Elder  Aug.  11,  1901,  by  Valentine 
Smith,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Central 
States  in  1906-1908,  and  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  29, 
1916,   by   Francis   M.   Lyman. 

CRUMP,  Bert  Manuel,  Bishop  of 
the  Bluffdale  Ward,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  June  15,  1887,  in  Riverton,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  C.  Crump  and  Lovina 
Kidd.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  1,  1895, 
ordained  an  Elder  in  1906,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Southern  States  in  1906- 
1908,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Feb.  7,  1925,  by  Rudger 
Clawson. 

DANSIE,  Robert,  Bishop  of  the 
Herriman  Ward,  West  Jordan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1887  to  1896,  was  born 
Feb.  5,  1825,  in  Boxford,  Suffolk,  Eng- 
land, a  son  of  James  Dansie  and  Sarah 
Chenery.  He  was  baptized  Oct.  8, 
1849,  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1862,  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1879, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Dec.  12,  1887,  by  Heber  J. 
Grant.    He  died  Nov.  10,  1920. 

EGBERT,  John  Alexander,  Bishop 
of  the  West  Jordan  Ward,  West  Jor- 
dan Stake,  Utah,  from  1892  to  1921, 
was  born  March  28,  1842,  in  Hancock 
County,  111.,  a  son  of  Samuel  and  Mar- 
garet M.  B.  Egbert.  He  was  baptized 
April  20,  1851,  ordained  a  Seventy 
June  15,  1884,  by  William  W.  Taylor, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op June  1,  1891,  by  Lorenzo  Snow. 

GARDNER.  William  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  West  Jordan  Ward,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1911  to  1919,  was 
born  April  20,  1877,  in  West  Jordan, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Duncan  Gardner  and 
Elizabeth  Irving.  He  was  baptized 
June  4,  1885,  ordained  a  Seventy  May 
12,  1899,  by  George  Teasdale,  filled  a 


668 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1899-1901, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  28, 
1911,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman,  and  sus- 
tained as  Bishop  April  23,  1911. 

HARRIS,  McGee,  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Herriman  Branch,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1855  to  1858,  was 
born  Nov.  8,  1800,  in  Wilson  Co.,  Ten- 
nessee, a  son  of  William  and  Marga- 
ret Harris.  He  was  sustained  as  pre- 
siding Elder  Feb.   11,   1855. 

JENSEN,  Lars,  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Riverton  Branch,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  from  1881  to  1883,  was  born 
May  10,  1814,  in  Helsingor,  Denmark. 
He  emigrated  to  Utah  in  1859,  and  was 
appointed  presiding  Elder  in  1881.  He 
died  April  23,  1883,  as  a  Patriarch. 

LYON,  David  Cairns,  Bishop  of  the 
Bingham  Ward,  West  Jordan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1924  to  1930 -f,  was  born 
Jan.  6,  1881,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  David  Ross  Lyon  and  Mary 
Cairns.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  4,  1895, 
ordained  an  Elder  by  John  H.  Russell, 
filled  a  mission  to  Holland  in  1909- 
1912,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Feb. 
11,  1923,  by  Richard  R.  Lyman,  and  a 
Bishop  Feb.  8,  1925,  by  Rudger  Claw- 
son. 

MYERS,  Wilford  Jacob,  Bishop  of 
the  Riverton  2nd  Ward,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  25,  1890,  in  Cottonwood,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jacob  Myers 
and  Annie  M.  Johnson.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  15,  1898,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty Nov.  23,  1911,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1911-1913, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  Oct.  23,  1927,  by  Joseph  F. 
Smith,  jun. 

ROBINSON,  John,  Bishop  of  the 
West  Jordan  Ward,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1852  to  1853,  was 
born  Dec.  27,  1792,  in  Cushing,  Lin- 
coln   (now  Knox)    Co.,   Missouri.      He 


emigi-ated  to  Utah  in   1847,  and  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  19,  1852. 

SILCOCK,  Nicholas  Thomas,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Riverton  Branch, 
West  Jordan  Stake,  Utah,  from  1870, 
to  1877,  was  born  Sept.  29,  1818,  in 
Staffordshire,  England,  a  son  of  John 
and  Ann  Silcock.  He  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1865. 

STOCKING,  Hyrum,  Bishop  of  the 
South  Jordan  Ward,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1930,  was 
born  Feb.  22,  1881,  in  South  Jordan, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Ensign  Israel  Stock- 
ing and  Elizabeth  Ellen  Arnold.  He 
was  baptized  May  2,  1889,  ordained 
an  Elder  in  August,  1906,  by  Joseph 
W.  Hutchings,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1906-1908,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  4,  1924,  by 
Richard  R.  Lyman,  and  a  Bishop  Feb. 
7,   1925,   by   Rudger   Clawson. 

THOMAS,  Dorus  Adams,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Lark  Branch,  West  Jor- 
.dan  Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  July  3,  1896,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  J.  Thom- 
as and  Amy  H.  Adams.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  3,  1904,  ordained  an  Elder 
June  18,  1916,  by  Charles  J.  Thomas, 
filled  a  mission  to  New  Zealand  in 
1916-1919,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  set  apart  as  presiding  Eld- 
er May  27,  1923,  by  Soren  Rasmussen. 

THOMSON,  William,  Bishop  of  the 
Bingham  Ward,  West  Jordan  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1894  to  1901,  was  born  in 
October,  1857,  in  Stirlingshire,  Scot- 
land, a  son  of  William  Thomson  and 
Margaret  Wilson.  He  was  baptized 
March  22,  1868,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Oct.  7,  1899,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

WATERS,  William  Birch,  Bishop 
of  the  Bingham  Ward,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1901  to  1913,  was 
born  Sept.  25,  1858,  in  Springville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Waters  and  Sarah 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


669 


Birch.  He  was  baptized  June  13, 
1868,  and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  set  apart  as  second  counselor  Oct. 
23,  1899,  by  Charles  W.  Penrose.  He 
died  Nov.  18,  1935. 

WEBB,  Vernal  Charles,  Bishop  of 
the  Riverton  1st  Ward,  West  Jordan 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Dec.  12,  1897,  in  Riverton,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Wilford  Webb  and  Ruth 
Jacklin.  He  was  baptized  Jan.  7, 
1906,  ordained  an  Elder  Feb.  25,  1918, 
by  James  E.  Madsen,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Central  States  in  1919-1921,  and 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Oct.  30,  1927,  by  Joseph  F.  Smith, 
jun. 


Woodruff  Stake 

BELL,  Benjamin,  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Almy  Branch,  Woodruff  Stake, 
Wyoming,  from  1900  to  1901,  was  born 
July  31,  1868,  in  Frostburg,  Allegany 
Co.,  Maryland,  a  son  of  William  Bell 
and  Ann  Wheelden  (or  Whedon).  He 
was  baptized  Dec.  13,  1891,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Feb.  3,  1902,  by 
John  M.  Baxter.  He  died  in  Kem- 
merer. 

BELL,  William,  Bishop  of  the  Cum- 
berland Ward,  Woodruff  Stake,  Wyo- 
ming, from  1905  to  1907,  and  presiding 
Elder  from  1902  to  1905,  was  born 
May  29,  1857,  in  Frostburg,  Allegany 
Co.,  Maryland,  a  son  of  William  Bell 
and  Ann  Wheelden  (or  Whedon).  He 
was  baptized  in  1880  in  Derbyshire, 
England,  having  gone  with  his  parents 
to  England  in  1875.  He  presided  over 
the  Tupton  Branch,  returned  to  Amer- 
ica in  1885,  and  after  presiding  over 
the  Almy  Branch,  Wyoming,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  John  M. 
Baxter  and  a  Bishop  Aug.  6,  1905,  by 
Rudger  Clawson.  He  died  Jan.  6, 
1935. 

BROWN,  James,  jun.,  first  counsel- 
or in  the  Woodruff  Stake  presidency, 


Wyoming,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  July  15,  1883,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  Brown  and 
Christina  Hunter.  He  was  baptized 
July  15,  1891,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  20,  1924,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith, 
and  set  apart  as  first  counselor  in  the 
Woodruff  Stake  presidency  July  1, 
1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

HARRISON,  Harold  Roy,  Bishop  of 
the  Kemmerer  Ward,  Woodruff  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1919  to  1921,  was  born 
Dec.  26,  1885,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Harold  Henry  Harrison  and 
Clara  Mold.  He  was  baptized  June  5, 
1894,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1904-1906,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Stephen  L.  Richards, 
and  a  Bishop  Oct.  25,  1919,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards. 

HUTCHINSON,  Alonzo,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Almy  Branch,  Woodruff 
Stake,  Wyo.,  in  1920,  was  born  Feb.  6, 
1875,  in  Hucknall-Torkard,  Notting- 
hamshire, England,  a  son  of  Abraham 
Hutchinson  and  Elizabeth  Lester.  He 
was  baptized  April  19,  1885,  after 
coming  to  America  in  1884,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  22, 
1903,  by  John  M.  Baxter. 

JOHNSON,  Lawrence  Burton,  Bish- 
op of  the  Randolph  Ward,  Woodruff 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Feb.  8,  1889,  in  Laketown,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Willis  Johnson  and  Eliza 
Rachel  Kearl.  He  was  baptized  July 
16,  1897,  ordained  a  High  Priest  July 
20,  1924,  and  a  Bishop  Oct.  13,  1929, 
by  Geo.  Albert  Smith. 

LARSON,  Oluf,  Bishop  of  the  Ran- 
dolph Ward,  Woodruff  Stake,  Wyo., 
from  1922  to  1929,  was  born  Feb.  16, 
1865,  in  Circleville,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Oluf  Christian  Larsen  and  Anna  Marie 
Pedersen.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy 
in  1898  by  Jonathan  G.  Kimball,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  Norway  in  1898- 
1900.    He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 


670 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


by  Abraham  Owen  Woodruff,  and  a 
Bishop  July  30,  1922,  by  Richard  R. 
Lyman.  He  and  his  wife  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Central  States  in  1920- 
1922. 


Utah,  a  son  of  Geo.  Alma  Peart  and 
Jane  McFail.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  April  28,  1918,  by 
Orson  F.  Whitney. 


LEE,  William  Henry,  Bishop  of  the 
Woodruff  Ward,  Woodruff  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1871  to  1890,  was  born 
May  12,  1827,  a  son  of  Ezekiel  Lee. 
He  was  appointed  acting  Bishop  in 
1871  by  Wm.  Budge.  He  died  Nov. 
25,  1910. 

MARTIN,  Joseph  Moroni,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Hilliard  Branch,  Woodruff 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1918  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Jan.  22,  1881,  in  South  Norman- 
ton,  Derbyshire,  England,  a  son  of 
Joseph  B.  Martin  and  Ann  West.  He 
came  to  America  May  17,  1882,  was 
baptized  Nov.  9,  1889,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  May  24,  1929,  by  Sam- 
uel Rex. 

McMillan,  David,  Bishop  of  the 
Kemmerer  Ward,  Woodruff  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1902  to  1906,  was  born 
March  10,  1860,  in  Beleree,  County  of 
Down,  Ireland,  a  son  of  Hugh  Mc- 
Millan and  Catherine  Fowler.  He  was 
baptized  Feb.  1,  1879,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  2,  1902, 
by  John  W.  Taylor. 

McPHIE,  John  Robertson,  Bishop 
of  the  Kemmerer  Ward,  Woodruff 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1924  to  1926,  was 
born  Nov.  12,  1873,  in  Bishop  Briggs, 
Scotland,  a  son  of  Benjamin  McPhie 
and  Marian  Robertson.  He  emigrated 
to  America  when  seven  years  old,  was 
baptized  at  the  age  of  eight  years, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Oct.  25, 
1919,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a  Bish- 
op July  20,  1924,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

PEART,     George     Archibald,     jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Randolph  Ward,  Wood- 
ruff Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1918  to  1922, 
was  born  Aug.  16,  1874,  in  Randolph, 


PETERSON,  Jesse  Yelton,  Bishop 
of  the  Diamondville  Ward,  Woodruff 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1927  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Nov.  10,  1878,  in  Coalville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  George  Henry  Peterson 
and  Mary  Ann  Robinson.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1889,  ordained  an  Elder  by 
John  H.  Stevenson,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1909-1912,  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  July  10,  1927,  by  Geo. 
F.  Richards,  and  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  April  15,  1928,  by  David  0. 
McKay. 

TINGEY,    Thomas    Josiah,    jun., 

Bishop  of  the  Woodruff  Ward,  Wood- 
ruff Stake,  Utah,  from  1913  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  May  16,  1888,  in  Woodruff,  a 
son  of  Thomas  J.  Tingey  and  Annie 
Cox.  He  was  baptized  May  17,  1896, 
ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  20,  1904,  by 
his  father,  filled  a  mission  to  New 
Zealand  in  1909-1912,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  April 
27,  1913,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

WILDE,  Adelbert  Earl,  Bishop  of 
the  Kemmerer  Ward,  Woodruff  Stake, 
Wyo.,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
June  24,  1890,  in  Thayne,  Wyo.,  a 
son  of  Thomas  Henry  Wilde  and  Ro- 
setta  Priscilla  Nelson.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  24,  1898,  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Reuben  F.  Burton  in  1913,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  California  in  1913- 
1915.  He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Sept.  21,  1924,  and  a  Bishop  Jan.  16, 
1927,  by  Jos.  F.  Smith,  jun. 

WILDE,  George  Fredrick,  Bishop  of 
the  Cumberland  Ward,  Woodruff 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1907  to  1928,  was 
born  Nov.  25,  1869,  at  Coalville,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Fredrick  Wilde  and  Louise 
Farnsworth.     He  was  baptized  when 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


671 


nine  years  old,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Peter  McKinnon,  and  a  Bishop 
April  28,  1907,  by  Francis  M.  Lyman. 

WRIGHT,  Charles  Henry,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Kemmerer  Branch,  Wood- 
ruff Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1907  to  1912, 
was  born  Sept.  26,  1872,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Charles  Wright 
and  Annie  Galloway.  He  was  bap- 
tized Oct.  7,  1880,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  March  22,  1903,  by  Archibald 
McKinnon. 

YOUNG,  Parley  Absalom,  Bishop 
of  the  Cumberland  Ward,  Woodruff 
Stake,  Wyo.,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  26,  1886,  at  Fairview,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Parley  Rogers  Young  and 
Bertha  Hansen.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Central  States  in  1919-1922, 
and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan.  15, 
1928,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 


Yellowstone  Stake 

BATES,  Ernest  George,  Bishop  of 
the  Chester  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1920  to 
1926,  was  born  June  26,  1889,  at  Ly- 
man, Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of 
Thomas  Y.  Bates  and  Nora  Foster. 
He  was  baptized  July  1,  1901,  or- 
dained a  Seventy  May  21,  1911,  by 
Joseph  W.  McMurrin,  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States  in  1909-1911, 
and  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
Bishop  April  24,  1920,  by  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

BINGHAM,  Elisha  H.,  Bishop  of 
the  Chester  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1915  to 
1920,  was  born  Dec.  23,  1888,  at 
Blackfoot,  Idaho,  a  son  of  E.  R.  Bing- 
ham and  Emma  Walker.  He  was  bap- 
tized July  2,  1898,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Oct.  24,  1915, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 


BLANCHARD,  Byron,  Bishop  of 
the  Chester  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1904  to 
1915,  was  born  Feb.  3,  1872,  in  Spring- 
ville,  Utah,  a  son  of  Alma  Moroni 
Blanchard  and  Emma  Bocock.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  15,  1885,  ordained  an 
Elder  March  5,  1899,  by  John  Watson, 
filled  a  mission  to  Colorado  in  1902- 
1904,  and  was  chosen  Bishop  of  the 
Chester  Ward  in  1904,  shortly  after 
he  returned  from  his  mission. 

BRADSHAW,  Ernest,  Bishop  of  the 
Egin  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake,  Fre- 
mont County,  Idaho,  in  1930 +  ,  was 
born  in  June,  1891,  at  Alma,  Uinta 
Co.,  Wyoming,  a  son  of  Edward  Brad- 
shaw  and  Sarah  E.  Dexter.  He  was 
baptized  June  10,  1899,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June  29, 
1930,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

BROWN,  Hyrum,  Bishop  of  the 
Chester  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1891  to 
1902,  was  born  Oct.  4,  1854,  at  Union 
Fort,  Utah,  a  son  of  Thomas  J.  Brown 
and  Mary  Remington.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1862,  set  apart  as  president 
of  the  Chester  Branch  April  15,  1890, 
and  later  ordained  a  Bishop  when  the 
branch  became  a  ward.  He  died  Sept. 
22,  1932. 

CARBINE,  Edmund  Z.,  Bishop  of 
the  Parker  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1892  to 
1902,  was  born  Sept.  15,  1864,  at  East 
Weber,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam V.  O.  Carbine.  He  was  baptized 
in  1873,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  Feb.  12,   1893. 

CARBINE,  William  Henry,  Bishop 
of  the  St.  Anthony  Ward,  Yellow- 
stone Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from 
1901  to  1906,  was  born  March  29, 
1871,  at  Clarkston,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  William  V.  Carbine  and  Sarah 
Jane  Miller.  He  was  baptized  March 
30,   1879,  ordained  a   Seventy  Oct.   7, 


672 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


1897,  by  Elias  S.  Kimball,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Montana  in  1897,  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  March  26,  1900,  by  John 
Henry  Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
July  22,  1901,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

CUNNINGHAM,  Hyrum  R.,  Bishop 
of  the  Ashton  (Vernon)  Ward,  Yel- 
lowstone Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho, 
from  1909  to  1921,  was  born  Jan.  12, 
1855,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Andrew  Cunningham  and  Lucinda 
Rawlins.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  23, 
1879,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest  June 
17,  1907.  He  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Jan.  11,  1909,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

CUTLER,  Parley  LeRoy,  Bishop  of 
the  Vernon  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1903  to 
1904,  was  born  Sept.  9,  1874,  in  Brig- 
ham  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Parley  Cut- 
ler and  Mary  Frances  Dopp.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  eight  years  old, 
and  became  a  Bishop  in  Vernon  in 
1903.  He  died  Nov.  7,  1904,  at  Ver- 
non, Idaho. 

DAVIS,  George,  Bishop  of  the  Wil- 
ford  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake,  Fre- 
mont Co.,  Idaho,  from  1887  to  1893, 
was  born  Nov.  4,  1833,  at  Stoke,  Ab- 
bott, Dorsetshire,  England,  a  son  of 
William  Davis  and  Lucy  Davis.  He 
was  baptized  Feb.  18,  1849,  ordained 
a  High  Priest  July  24,  1877,  by  Frank- 
lin D.  Richards,  and  ordained  a  Bishop 
Aug.  21,  1887,  by  Lorenzo  Snow.  He 
died  June  5,   1912. 

EGBERT,  Samuel  Parley,  Bishop  of 
the  Ashton  (Vernon)  Ward,  Yellow- 
stone Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  fi'om 
1904  to  1907,  was  born  Oct.  27,  1876, 
in  Lewiston,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Robert  N.  Egbert  and  Josephine 
McCausker.  He  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op in  1904. 

FARNSWORTH,  Albert  S.,  Bishop 
of  the  Chester  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1902 


to  1904,  was  born  Jan.  4,  1870,  at  Bea- 
ver, Utah,  a  son  of  Philo  T.  Farns- 
worth  and  Agnes  Patterson.  He  was 
ordained  a  Bishop  in  1902. 

FOGG,  James  Ezra,  second  counsel- 
or in  the  Yellowstone  Stake  presi- 
dency, Idaho,  from  1909  to  1913,  was 
born  Oct.  8,  1868,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  E.  Fogg  and 
Martha  Woodard.  He  acted  as  Bishop 
of  the  St.  Anthony  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  fi\)m  1906  to  1909,  and  was  set 
apart  as  second  counselor  Jan.  10, 
1909,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards.  He  died 
Aug.  18,  1912,  at  Ogden,  Utah. 

FREER,  Joseph  Slack,  Bishop  of 
the  Twin  Groves  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1909 
to  1914,  was  born  Sept.  22,  1863,  at 
Leicestershire,  England,  a  son  of  Wil- 
liam Freer  and  Martha  Slack.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  12,  1871,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Jan.  11,  1909, 
by  George  F.  Richards.  He  died  July 
7,  1917,  at  Layton,  Utah. 

HANSON,  Soren  J.,  Bishop  of  the 
Twin  Groves  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1914 
to  1920,  was  born  Oct.  14,  1866,  at  Mt, 
Pleasant,  Utah,  a  son  of  Soren  Jacob- 
son  Hanson  and  Mary  Ann  Mickelson. 
He  was  baptized  July  10,  1875,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Jan.  11,  1909, 
by  George  F.  Richards,  and  ordained 
a  Bishop  Jan.  23,  1915,  by  Anthony 
W.  Ivins. 

HENDRICKSON,  Iver,  Bishop  of 
the  Farnum  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1919  to  1928, 
was  born  Feb.  1,  1865,  in  Gunnison, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Iver  C.  Hendriksen  and 
Mette  K.  Hansen.  He  was  baptized 
April  2,  1873,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Feb.  1,  1914,  by  Daniel  G.  Miller,  and 
ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  26,  1919,  by 
Rudger   Clawson. 

HESS,  Horace  Arnold,  Bishop  of 
the  Ashton  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


673 


Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  fi'om  1921  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept.  19,  1880,  in 
Farmington,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
John  W.  Hess  and  Sarah  Miller.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  23,  1888,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1902-1903,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  31,  1921,  by 
Stephen  L.  Richards. 

HILLAM,  Abraham  Baron,  Bishop 
of  the  Marysville  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  fr.om  1920 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Oct.  18,  1876,  in 
Brigham  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Abra- 
ham B.  Hillam  and  Mary  Baron.  He 
was  baptized  Oct.  18,  1884,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  30,  1916,  by  Charles 
E.  Lloyd,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  April 
24,  1920,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

HUNTER,  Heman  Hyde,  Bishop  of 
the  Egin  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1902  to  1907, 
was  born  April  10,  1864,  in  Grants- 
ville,  Utah,  a  son  of  Edward  Hunter 
and  Martha  Ann  Hyde.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  March  23,  1895,  by 
George  Reynolds,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Southern  States  in  1895-1896,  and 
was  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the  Egin 
Ward  June  29,  1902. 

JORGENSEN,  Eli  Moroni,  Bishop  of 
the  St.  Anthony  1st  Ward,  Yellow- 
stone Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from 
1925  to  1928,  was  born  Sept.  16,  1884, 
at  Bear  River  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Rasmus  Jorgensen  and  Bertha  C.  Pe- 
terson. He  was  baptized  Sept.  9,  1892, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  3,  1912,  by  J. 
T.  B.  Mason,  filled  a  mission  to  Mex- 
ico in  1919,  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
April  20,  1924,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith, 
and  sustained  as  Bishop  of  the  St. 
Anthony  1st  Ward  Jan.  11,  1925. 

KELLY,  Philemon  Merrill,  Bishop 
of  the  St.  Anthony  1st  Ward,  Yellow- 
stone Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from 
1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  17, 
1877,  at  American  Fork,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  Kelly  and  Christine  Peter- 


son. He  was  baptized  June  14,  1885, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Oct.  19,  1900,  by  J. 
Golden  Kimball,  filled  a  mission  to 
Germany  in  1900-1903,  and  to  Cali- 
fornia in  1927-1929.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  July  1,  1928, 
by  Richard  R.  Lyman. 

KERR,  Marion  Joseph,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  presidency  of  the  Yellow- 
stone Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from 
1909  to  1925,  was  born  Nov.  6,  1861,  at 
Richmond,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Robert  Marion  Kerr  and  Nancy  Jane 
Rawlins.  He  was  baptized  when  about 
eight  years  old,  served  as  Bishop  of 
the  Ora  Ward  in  1901-1907,  and  as 
Bishop  of  the  Ashton  Ward  in  1907- 
1909.  He  was  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Yellowstone  Stake  presi- 
dency Jan.  10,  1909,  by  David  O.  Mc- 
Kay. 

KLINGLER,  Karl  Conrad,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  Yel- 
lowstone Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho, 
from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Nov. 
30,  1891,  at  Rexburg,  Fremont  Co., 
Idaho,  a  son  of  Frederick  L.  Klingler 
and  Christine  G.  Walz.  He  was  bap- 
tized when  eight  years  of  age,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  5,  1921, 
by  C.  E.  Lloyd. 

LAW,  Preston  Floyd,  Bishop  of  the 
Twin  Groves  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1929 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  April  4,  1907,  at 
Twin  Groves,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Charles 
H.  Law  and  Sarah  Hill.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  7,  1915,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  April  14,  1929, 
by  Melvin  J.  Ballard. 

LLOYD,  Charles  Edward,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  Yel- 
lowstone Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho, 
from  1913  to  1925,  was  born  Jan.  19, 
1865,  at  Wellsville,  Cache  Co.,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Thomas  Lloyd  and  Susannah 
Stone.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  March 


Vol.  IV,  No.  43 


October  24,  1936 


674 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


2,  1894,  by  Seymour  B.  Young,  filled 
a  mission  to  England  in  1894-1895, 
and  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor 
in  the  Yellowstone  Stake  presidency 
Nov.  2,  1913,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

MILLER,  Arnold  Daniel,  Bishop  of 
the  St.  Anthony  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1909 
to  1916,  was  born  March  2,  1852,  at 
Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  a  son  of  Henry 
W.  Miller  and  Elmira  Pond.  He  was 
baptized  in  1860  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Nov.  24,  1884.  On  April 
24,  1909,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
by  Rudger  Clawson,  and  he  filled  a 
mission  to  Australia  in  1917-1921  as 
president  of  that  mission.  He  died 
Sept.  3,  1924,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

MORRISON,  John  Irvin,  Bishop  of 
the  Farnum  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1906  to  1909, 
was  born  April  2,  1870,  at  Franklin, 
Oneida  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Andrew 
Morrison  and  Mary  Ann  Smith  Whit- 
worth.  He  was  baptized  June  5,  1879, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Oct.  20,  1906,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

MURDOCK,  Thomas  Todd,  Bishop 
of  the  Farnum  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1928 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  March  4,  1866,  in 
Heber  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Murry 
Murdock  and  Ann  Steele.  He  was 
baptized  in  1874,  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Central  States  in  1907-1909,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  July  30,  1922, 
by  Daniel  G.  Miller,  and  was  sustained 
as  Bishop  of  the  Farnum  Ward  Dec. 
16,   1928. 


Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  July  25, 
1926,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

ORME,  Samuel  Washington,  Bishop 

of  the  Wilford  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1903 
to  1916,  was  born  Sept.  19,  1858,  at 
Tooele,  Utah.  He  was  sustained  as 
Bishop  of  the  Wilford  Ward  April  12, 
1903,  and  died  April  10,  1924. 

ORR,  Joseph,  Bishop  of  the  Egin 
Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake,  Fremont 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1915  to  1930,  was 
born  Jan.  8,  1877,  at  Freedom,  Sanpete 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Richard  Charles 
Orr  and  Caroline  Derricott.  He  was 
baptized  when  about  ten  years  old, 
and  ordained  a  Bishop  in  January, 
1915,  by  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

PETERSEN,  Erastus  P.,  Bishop  of 
the  Twin  Groves  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1920 
to  1929,  was  born  Sept.  6,  1893,  at  Mt. 
Pleasant,  Utah,  a  son  of  Frederik 
Petersen  and  Annie  Marsine  Jacobson. 
He  was  baptized  Oct.  12,  1901,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  July  27,  1919,  by 
James  E.  Talmage,  and  ordained  a 
Bishop  Oct.  30,  1920,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

RUDD,  George  Fredrick,  Bishop  of 
the  Parker  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1924  to 
1930  +  ,  was  born  April  17,  1888,  at 
Parker,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Joseph  S. 
Rudd  and  Vilate  E.  Rudd.  He  was 
baptized  July  2,  1896,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  31,  1920,  by  George  F. 
Richards,  and  ordained  a  Bishop  July 
19,  1924,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 


ORME,  Joseph  Roy,  Bishop  of  the 
Wilford  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1926  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  June  3,  1894,  in 
Tooele  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Samuel 
W.  Orme  and  Mary  A.  Smith.  He  was 
baptized  July  6,  1902,  ordained  a  High 
Priest   April   20,    1924,   by    David   A. 


SMITH,  Henry  W.,  Bishop  of  the 
Farnum  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1909  to  1914, 
was  born  June  27,  1877,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Henx-y  Smith 
and  Lydia  E.  Kei'shaw.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  July,  1885,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Oct.  20,  1906,  by  Mark  Austin, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


675 


and  ordained  a  Bishop  Oct.  24,  1909, 
by  David  0.  McKay. 

SMITH,  Thomas  Sasson,  Bishop  of 
the  Wilford  Ward,  Bannock  (now 
Yellowstone)  Stake,  Idaho,  from  1884 
to  1887,  was  born  April  3,  1818,  in 
the  State  of  New  York,  a  son  of  Jere- 
miah Smith  and  Abigail  Demont.  He 
was  baptized  June  15,  1844,  acted  as 
president  of  the  Salmon  River  Mis- 
sion, and  was  a  pioneer  in  many  places. 
He  was  called  at  the  October  Confer- 
ence in  1864  to  take  a  company  and 
settle  the  Muddy  Valley;  this  mission 
would  connect  St.  George  and  Call's 
Landing  on  the  Colorado  River.  On 
Jan.  8,  1865,  with  eight  brethren  and 
three  sisters  he  arrived  on  the  Muddy 
and  the  settlement  of  St.  Thomas 
(named  after  Bro.  Smith)  was  laid 
out  as  a  townsite.  He  resided  for 
many  years  in  Farmington,  Davis  Co., 
Utah,  and  moved  to  Wilford,  Idaho,  in 
1884,  as  one  of  the  first  settlers.  He 
died  in  Wilford,  Bingham  Co.,  Idaho, 
July  1,  1890. 

SPIERS,  Willard  Winfield  Marriptt, 

first  counselor  in  the  Yellowstone 
Stake  presidency,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho, 
from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  July 
29,  1879,  at  Plain  City,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  John  Marriott  Spiers 
and  Alberta  Blanch.  He  was  baptized 
in  1887,  ordained  a  Seventy  Nov.  9, 
1898,  by  J.  Golden  Kimball,  filled  a 
mission  to  Germany  in  1898-1901,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Aug.  2,  1907, 
by  George  Briggs,  served  as  Bishop 
of  the  St.  Anthony  Ward  from  1916 
to  1921,  and  as  Bishop  of  the  St.  An- 
thony 1st  Ward  from  1921  to  1925. 
He  was  set  apart  as  first  counselor 
in  the  stake  presidency  Oct.  16,  1927, 
by  George  F.  Richards. 

SWENSEN,  Severin,  Bishop  of  the 
St.  Anthony  2nd  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1925 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  21,  1870,  at 


Mt.  Pleasant,  Utah,  the  son  of  Andrew 
Swensen  and  Anna  Torgensen.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  of  age, 
ordained  a  Seventy  April  7,  1898,  by 
Christian  D.  Fjeldsted,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Norway  in  1898-1899,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Jan.  23,  1915,  and 
sustained  as  Bishop  of  the  St.  Anthony 
2nd    Ward    Jan.    11,    1925. 

PINCOCK,  George  Albert,  Bishop 
of  the  Wilford  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1898 
to  1903,  was  born  March  1,  1865,  in  Og- 
den,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  Pincock  and 
Isabella  Douglas.  He  was  baptized 
May  5,  1873,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
July  16,  1893,  by  Thomas  E.  Ricks,  fill- 
ed a  mission  to  the  Southern  States  in 
1895-1898,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop 
Sept.  1,  1898,  by  John  Henry  Smith. 

POTTER,  Earl  Heber,  Bishop  of  the 
Chester  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1926  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb.  9,  1884,  at  AK 
bion.  Cassia  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of  Heber 
Carlos  Potter  and  Julia  Huphines.  He 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Jan.  10, 
1925,  and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  Jan. 

15,  1927,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

RHODEHOUSE,  John  William,  Bish- 
op of  the  Egin  1st  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1907 
to  1915,  and  Bishop  of  the  Heman 
Ward,  in  the  same  Stake,  from  1915 
to  1917,  was  born  Aug.  11,  1882,  at 
Oxford,  Idaho,  a  son  of  William  H. 
Rhodehouse  and  Mary  Truscott.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  11,  1890,  and  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  Bishop  June 

16,  1907,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

ROBINSON,  Oliver  LeGrande,  Bish- 
op of  the  Egin  (Brighton)  Ward,  Yel- 
lowstone Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho, 
from  1891  to  1902,  was  born  Oct.  28, 
1860,  at  Farmington,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Oliver  Lee  Robinson  and  Lucy  Miller. 
He  was  baptized  in  October,  1868,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  June  9,  1895, 


676 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


by  John  W.  Taylor,  and  became  Bish- 
op in  1891. 

WATERS,  DeLoss  Clark.  Bishop  of 
the  Kilgore  Ward,  Yellowstone  Stake, 
Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  fiom  1917  to 
1921,  was  born  July  2,  1882,  at  Burr- 
ville,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Geor.^e  Birch  Waters  and  Laura  Ann 
Burr.  He  was  baptized  July  3,  1890, 
ordained  a  Seventy  Sept.  20,  1908,  by 
Rulon  S.  Wells,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northern  States  in  1912-1913,  Avas  or- 
dained a  Hi<4h  Priest  Aug-.  15,  1915, 
by  ^l.  J.  Kerr,  and  a  Bishop  July  29, 
1917,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

WHITE,  John  McArthur,  president 
of  the  Yellowstone  Stake,  Fremont 
Co.,  Idaho,  from  1925  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  7,  1874,  in  Willard,  Box 
Elder  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Stephen 
White  and  Agnes  McArthur.  He  was 
baptized  Nov.  2,  1882,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty June  7,  1899,  by  Joseph  W.  Mc- 
Murrin,  filled  a  mission  to  the  South- 
western States  in  1899-1901,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  a  Bishop 
July  31,  1921,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards, 
served  as  Bishop  of  the  St.  Anthony 
2nd  Ward  in  1921-1925,  and  was  set 
apart  as  president  of  the  Yellowstone 
Stake  Jan.  11,  1925,  by  George  F. 
Richards. 

WILLAKD,  James  Joseph,  Bishop 
of  the  Twin  Groves  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1900 
to  1909,  was  born  March  31,  1863,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  9,  1871,  and  was  ordained 
a  Bishop  Jan.  27,  1901,  by  John  W. 
Taylor. 

WILSON,  James  Henry.  Bishop  of 
the  IMarysville  Ward,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1891 
to  1907,  was  born  April  9,  1855,  at 
Grantsville,  Tooele  Co.,  Utah.  He  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  8,  1891, 
by  Thomas  E.  Ricks,  and  ordained  a 
Bi.shop  May  14,  1893,  by  Franklin  D. 
Richards. 


YOUNG,  Charles,  presiding  Elder 
of  the  Young  Branch,  Yellowstone 
Stake,  Fremont  Co.,  Idaho,  from  1914 
to  1919,  was  born  March  4,  1869,  at 
Baldwin,  Mille  Lacs  Co.,  Minnesota, 
a  son  of  James  Young  and  Martha 
Judkins.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  4, 
1878,  ordained  an  Elder  Nov.  25,  1900, 
and  set  apart  as  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Young  Branch  June  21,  1914,  by 
Daniel  D.  Miller. 


Young  Stake 


BEHRMANN,  Henry,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Young  Stake  presidency, 
from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Feb. 
23,  1876,  in  Fountain  Green,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Wilhelm  F.  O.  Behrmann  and 
Inger  Marie  Andersen.  He  was  bap- 
tized May  18,  1884,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Jan.  14,  1897,  by  Geo.  Teasdale,  and 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States 
in  1897-1899.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Sept.  30,  1906,  and  was 
set  apart  as  second  counselor  Nov. 
30,  1924,  by  Stephen  L.  Richards. 

BUTLER,  Henry  L.,  Bishop  of  the 
Kline  Ward,  Young  Stake,  from  1907 
to  1913,  was  boin  March  23,  1874,  in 
Payson,  Utah,  a  son  of  Henry  Butler 
and  Harriet  B.  Russell.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1882,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  July  28,  1907,  by 
John  Henry  Smith. 

DEAN,  Charles  Edwin,  Bishop  of 
the  Redmesa  Ward,  Young  Stake, 
Colorado,  from  1923  to  1930 -|-,  was 
born  Aug.  26,  1893,  in  Mill  Creek, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  Henry  Dean 
and  Florence  Ridges.  He  was  baptized 
Dec.  1,  1901,  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Aug.  20,  1917,  and  a  Bishop  Dec,  8, 
1923,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards. 

DECKER,  Alvin  Morris,  Bishop  of 
the  Mancos  Ward,  Young  Stake,  Colo- 
rado, from  1920  to  1928,  was  born 
April  12,  1880,  in  Bluff,  Utah,  a  son 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


677 


of  Nathaniel  Alvin  Decker  and  Emma 
Morris.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  Aug. 
15,  1909,  by  Jos.  W.  McMurrin,  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  April  22,  1911, 
by  Orson  F.  Whitney,  and  a  Bishop 
Aug.  21,  1920,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

EVENSEN,  Nils,  presiding  Elder  of 
the  Durango  Branch,  Young  Stake, 
Colorado,  from  1913  to  1929,  was  born 
June  14,  1858,  in  Ringsager,  Hede- 
mai'ken,  Norway,  the  son  of  Even 
Evensen  and  Kirsti  Madsen.  He  was 
baptized  June  2,  1873,  and  did  local 
missionary  work  before  coming  to 
Utah  in  1882.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  Jan.  8,  1884,  filled  a  mission 
to  Norway  in  1904-1906,  and  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  Aug.  4,  1907,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Taylor. 

FOUTZ,  Alma  Luff,  Bishop  of  the 
Burnham  or  Fruitland  Ward,  Young 
Stake,  New  Mexico,  from  1921  to  1928, 
was  born  March  9,  1882,  in  Moava, 
Arizona,  a  son  of  Joseph  L.  Foutz  and 
Emma  E.  Crossland.  He  was  baptized 
when  eight  years  old,  ordained  an 
Elder  Aug.  23,  1909,  by  Henry  Thomas 
Stolworthy,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Northwestern  States  in  1911-1913,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  March  13, 
1921,  by  Henry  Thomas  Stolworthy, 
and  a  Bishop  Aug.  28,  1921,  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard. 

SLADE,  Abram  B.,  Bishop  of  the 
Kline  Ward,  Young  Stake,  Colorado, 
from  1923  to  1926,  was  born  April  19, 
1878,  in  Pine  Valley,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Henry  Slade  and  Amanda  M.  Burgess. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  May  25, 
1913,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  who  also 
ordained  him  a  Bishop  Dec.  8,  1923. 

STOLWORTHY,  Jesse  Henry,  Bish- 
op of  the  Kline  Ward,  Young  Stake, 
from  1921  to  1923,  was  born  April  3, 
1895,  in  Huntington,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Henry  Thomas  Stolworthy  and  Lydia 


P.  Young.  He  was  baptized  June  6, 
1903,  ordained  a  High  Priest  Nov.  24, 
1919,  by  Geo.  F.  Richards,  and  a  Bish- 
op Aug.  28,  1921,  by  Melvin  J.  Bal- 
lard. 

STOLWORTHY,    Willard    Chase, 

first  counselor  in  the  Young  Stake 
presidency  from  1924  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Sept.  16,  1891,  in  Orderville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Henry  Thomas  Stol- 
worthy and  Johanna  Elizabeth  Cov- 
ington. He  was  baptized  in  September, 
1899,  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
Spates  in  1912-1913,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  Feb.  21,  1914,  by  Rudger 
Clawson,  and  set  apart  as  first  coun- 
selor in  the   stake   presidency    March 

22,  1925. 

TAYLOR,  Elmer  Franklin,  presi- 
dent of  the  Young  Stake,  Colorado 
and  New  Mexico,  from  1924  to  1930 +  , 
was  born  Feb.  23,  1871,  in  Santaquin, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Norman  Taylor  and 
Lydia  Forbush.  He  was  baptized 
r.bout    1879,    ordained    an    Elder    Dec. 

23,  1892,  by  John  B.  Maiben,  and  a 
High  Priest  Jan.  14,  1900,  by  John 
R.  Young,  and  ordained  a  Patriarch 
March  9,  1924,  by  James  E.  Talmage. 

TAYLOR,  Hiram  Martin,  first  coun- 
selor in  the  Young  Stake  presidency 
from  1912  to  1921,  was  born  Nov.  11, 
1860,  in  Santaquin,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Norman  Taylor  and  Lydia  P^rbush. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years 
old,  ordained  a  High  Priest  in  1890, 
and  a  Bishop  May  27,  1908,  presided 
over  the  Redmesa  Ward,  and  was 
chosen  first  counselor  in  the  stake 
presidency  in  1912. 

ZUFELT,  (Jeorge  Henry,  Bishop  of 
the  Kline  Ward,  Young  Stake,  Colo- 
rado, from  1926  to  1928,  was  born  Nov. 
21,  1900,  at  Jewett,  New  Mexico,  a 
son  of  Reuben  Zufelt  and  Isabella  Mc- 
Bride.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  and  sustained  as  Bishop 
Oct.  31,  1926. 


678 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Zion  Park  Stake 

BALLARD,  James  Monroe,  Bishop 
of  the  Grafton  Ward,  Zion  Park  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1887  to  1900,  and  from 
1903  to  1907,  was  born  Sept.  26,  1847, 
in  Lee  County,  Iowa,  a  son  of  John 
Harvey  Ballard  and  Charlotte  Pin- 
cock.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1852,  was 
baptized  in  1856,  ordained  an  Elder 
May  8,  1871,  by  Elias  Smith  and  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  by  Moses 
Thatcher  Nov.  27,  1887.  He  died  May 
3,  1925. 

BEEBE,  LeRoy  Winslow,  Bishop  of 
the  Virj?in  City  Ward,  Zion  Park 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1886  to  1905,  was 
born  Jan.  25,  1840,  in  Sheridan,  New 
York,  a  son  of  William  A.  Beebe  and 
Louisa  Newton.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  (in  1848)  in  Iowa, 
came  to  Utah  in  1852,  and  was  or- 
dained a  Bishop  Nov.  17,  1886,  by 
Wilford   Woodruflf. 

BRINGHURST,  Leo,  Bishop  of  the 
Toquerville  Ward,  Zion  Park  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 -(-,  was  born 
Jan.  23,  1897,  in  Toquerville,  a  son 
of  Wm.  A.  Bringhurst  and  Mary  J. 
Stapley.  He  was  baptized  March  2, 
1905,  ordained  an  Elder  March  20, 
1921,  by  James  Z.  Naegle,  filled  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1921-1922, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Dec.  11, 
1927,  by  Geo.  F.  Richaj-ds,  and  a  Bish- 
op Dec.  7,  1929,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

BRINGHURST,  VVilliam  Augustus. 

Bishop  of  the  Toquerville  Ward,  Zion 
Park  Stake,  Utah,  from  1874  to  1912, 
was  born  Jan.  26,  1839,  in  Lyonville, 
Chester  Co.,  Penn.,  a  son  of  Samuel 
Bringhurst  and  Eleanor  Beitler.  He 
came  to  the  Valley  in  1847,  was  bap- 
tized in  August  of  that  year,  in  the 
Platte  River,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  15,  1874,  by 
Brigham  Young.  He  died  March  8, 
1912. 


CRAWFORD,  Daniel,  Bishop  of  the 
Springdale  Ward,  Zion  Park  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1926  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
March  25,  1879,  in  Rockville,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Wm.  Robinson  Crawford  and 
Cornelia  Gifford.  He  was  baptized 
June  3,  1888,  and  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  18,  1926,  by 
John   A.   Widtsoe. 

FLANIGAN,  Alma  Emmett,  Bishop 

of  the  Virgin  City  Ward,  Zion  Park 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 -h,  was 
born  Oct.  17,  1898,  in  Springdale, 
Utah,  a  son  of  David  A.  Flanigan  and 
Clarinda  M.  Stout.  He  was  baptized 
in  1907,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
and  Bishop  March  17,  1928,  by  David 
O.  McKay. 

GUBLER,  Ovando,  Bishop  of  the 
La  Verkin  Ward,  Zion  Park  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1928  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Feb.  10,  1900,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  the 
son  of  Henry  W.  Gubler  and  Susanna 
Pickett.  He  was  baptized  July  11, 
1908,  ordained  an  Elder  June  25,  1923, 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Central  States 
in  1923-1926,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  March  17,  1928,  by 
David  O.  McKay. 

HEPWORTH,  Edmund,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Springdale  Branch,  Zion 
Park  Stake,  Utah,  from  1879  to  1880, 
was  born  March  7,  1841,  in  Yorkshire, 
England,  a  son  of  Joseph  Hepworth 
and  Mary  Hurst.  He  was  baptized  in 
England,  came  to  Utah  in  1863,  and 
was  appointed  presiding  Elder  June 
27,  1879. 

HEPWORTH,  Squire,  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Springdale  Branch,  Zion 
Park  Stake,  Utah,  from  1880  to  1887, 
was  born  May  4,  1843,  in  Yorkshire, 
England.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1864, 
and  served  as  presiding  Elder  from 
1880  until  Nov.  27,  1887,  when  he  was 
set  apart  as  first  counselor  to  Bishop 
Wm.  Robinson  Crawford. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


679 


HIRSCHI,  Claudius,  president  of 
the  Zion  Park  Stake,  Utah,  from  1929 
to  1930 +  ,  was  born  Sept.  13,  1892, 
in  Rockville,  Utah,  a  son  of  David 
Hirschi  and  Mary  M.  Petty.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  13,  1900,  ordained  a 
High  Priest  June  15,  1924,  by  Geo.  F. 
Richards,  and  was  chosen  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Zion  Park  Stake  Dec.  8, 
1929. 

ISOM,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  the  Hur- 
ricane Ward,  Zion  Park  Stake,  Utah, 
from  1907  to  1923,  was  born  April  27, 
1869,  in  Mountain  Dell,  Utah,  a  son 
of  William  Isom  and  Katherine 
Woolfe.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  in  No- 
vember, 1895,  by  Abraham  H.  Can- 
non, filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  in  1895-1898,  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  John  R.  Murdock  at 
Beaver,  Utah,  and  acted  as  Bishop  of 
the  Virgin  City  Ward  from  1905-1907, 
and  was  set  apart  as  Bishop  of  the 
Hurricane  Ward  by  Francis  M.  Lyman 
Sept.  5,  1907.     He  died  Feb.  2,  1923. 

JOHNSON,  Frank  Tilton,  Bishop 
of  the  Hurricane  North  Ward,  Zion 
Park  Stake,  Utah,  from  1928  to 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Aug.  3,  1878,  at 
Lee's  Ferry,  Arizona,  a  son  of  War- 
ren Marshall  Johnson  and  Samantha 
Nelson.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  ordained  a  Seventy  by  Fran- 
cis M.  Lyman,  filled  a  short  mission 
to  the  Western  States  in  1925-1926, 
was  ordained  a  High  Priest  Sept.  25, 
1927,  by  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  and  a  Bish- 
op Sept.  23,  1928,  by  David  0.  McKay. 

JONES.  Philetus,  Bishop  of  the 
Rockville  Ward,  Zion  Park  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1921  to  1930-)-,  was  born 
^^,  13,  1876,  in  Grafton,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Charles  H.  Jones  and  Viola  M.  Rus- 
sell. He  was  baptized  about  1884  and 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
Dec.  17,  1921,  by  Hyrum  G.  Smith. 

JUDD,  James,  first  counselor  in  the 
presidency  of  the  Zion  Park  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 


Nov.  15,  1884,  in  St.  George,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Thomas  Judd  and  Mary  Jane 
Ashworth.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  15, 
1892,  ordained  an  Elder  June  24,  1906, 
by  Edward  H.  Snow,  filled  a  mission 
to  Great  Britain  in  1914-1916,  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  was  set 
apart  as  first  counselor  in  the  Stake 
presidency  Dec.  8,  1929,  by  David  O. 
McKay. 

KLEINMAN,  Archie  Leland,  Bish- 
op of  the  Toquerville  Ward,  Zion  Park 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1927  to  1928,  was 
born  Sept.  23,  1900,  in  Arimo,  Idaho, 
a  son  of  Conrad  M.  Kleinman  and 
Eliza  B.  Bringhurst.  He  was  baptized 
June  6,  1909,  ordained  an  Elder  June 
10,  1924,  by  John  T.  Batty,  filled  a 
mission  to  the  Central  States  in  1924- 
1926,  was  sustained  as  Bishop  Nov. 
6,  1927,  and  ordained  a  High  Priest 
Nov.  20,  1927,  by  John  H.  Cottam. 

LANGSTON,  John  Franklin,  Bish- 
op of  the  Rockville  Ward,  Zion  Park 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1900  to  1906,  was 
born  Sept.  15,  1852,  in  Pottawattamie 
County,  Iowa,  a  son  of  John  Langston 
and  Clarinda  Phillips.  He  came  to 
Utah  in  1854,  v^^as  baptized  when  eight 
years  old,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  Bishop  Feb.  25,  1900,  by 
Daniel  D.  McArthur. 

MANNING,  William  Hart,  Bishop 
of  the  Toquerville  Ward,  Zion  Park 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1929  to  1930 +  ,  was 
born  Nov.  19,  1886,  in  Hooper,  Utah, 
the  son  of  John  H.  and  Elizabeth 
Hart.  He  was  baptized  July  5,  1904, 
and  ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bish- 
op Sept.  23,  1928,  by  David  O.  McKay. 

RUSSELL,  Alonzo  Haventon,  pre- 
siding Elder  of  the  Grafton  Branch, 
Zion  Park  Stake,  Utah,  from  1868  to 
1887,  was  born  July  31,  1821,  in  Royal- 
ton,  Vermont,  the  son  of  Thomas  B. 
Russell  and  Esther  Lyman.  He  was 
baptized  in  1841,  came  to  the  Valley 
in  1852,'  and  was  sustained  as  Bishop 
of  the  Grafton  Branch  when  it  be- 
came a  ward  in  1877. 


680 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


SMITH,  Charles  N.,  Bishop  of  the 
Rockville  Ward,  Zion  Park  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1868  to  1891,  was  born 
March  14,  1821,  in  Cradley,  Hereford- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  Thomas 
Smith  and  Mary  Tringham.  He  was 
baptized  in  August,  1840,  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Canada  in  1875-1876,  and  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  Rockville 
Ward  May  10,  1868,  by  Erastus  Snow. 

SPILSBURY,  Archie  Price,  Bishop 
of  the  Toquerville  Ward,  Zion  Park 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1912  to  1918,  was 
born  Jan.  10,  1882,  in  Toquei-ville, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Geo.  Moroni  Spilsbury 
and  Roselia  J.  Haight.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  6,  1890,  and  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  Bishop  Sept.  14, 
1912,  by  Heber  J.  Grant. 


SWENSON,  Russell  B.,  second  coun- 
selor in  the  Zion  Pai-k  Stake  presi- 
dency, Utah,  from  1929  to  1930,  was 
born  Sept.  14,  1902,  in  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Swen  L.  Swensen  and 
Susan  Brown.  He  was  baptized  Nov. 
5,  1910,  filled  a  mission  to  Germany 
in  1922-1925,  and  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1927  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 


GENEALOGICAL  SOCIETY  OF 
UTAH 


The  following  is  a  complete  list  of 
the  officers  or  directors  of  the  Geneal- 
ogical Society  of  Utah,  which  was  or- 
ganized in  1894. 

ANDERSON,  Nephi,  secretary  of 
the  Genealogical  Society  of  Utah  from 
1922  to  1923.  was  ])()ni  ,Tan.  22,  1866, 


WILSON,  Morris,  jun.,  Bishop  of 
the  La  Verkin  Ward,  Zion  Pax-k  Stake, 
Utah,  from  1904  to  1928,  was  born 
Sept.  13,  1874,  in  Mountain  Dell,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Morris  Wilson  and  Sarah 
Amelia  Isom.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old,  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States  in  1895-1898,  and  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  Bishop 
June  25,  1904,  by  Rudger  Clawson. 

ADDITIONAL  BIOGRAPHIES 

in  Christiania,  Norway,  a  son  of  Chris- 
tian Andersen  and  Petronelle  Nielsen. 
He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City  Jan.  6,  1923. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  296.) 

ANDERSON,  James  Henry,  secre- 
tary  of   the   Genealogical   Society   of 


Utah  from  1894  to  1896,  was  born 
Feb.  11,  1857,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
died  Oct.  19,  1934,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  1.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


681 


BENNETT,  Archibald  Fowler,  sec- 
retary of  the  Genealogical  Society  of 
Utah  since  1928,  was  born  March  17, 
1896,  at  Dingle,  Bear  Lake  Co.,  Idaho, 


a  son  of  William  David  Bennett  and 
Emma  Neat.  He  was  baptized  May 
1,  1904,  by  Zebulon  W.  Jacobs.  With 
his  parents  he  went  to  Alberta,  Can- 
ada, in  the  summer  of  1899,  the  family 
residing  at  Magrath  until  1907,  when 
they  moved  to  Taber.  There  young 
Archibald  was  ordained  to  offices  in 
the  Aaronic  Priesthood  and  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  Nov.  30,  1914,  by 
Bryant  R.  McMullin.  He  graduated 
from  the  Taber  High  School  in  1914, 
and  from  the  Calgary  Normal  School 
in  1915.  He  then  taught  school  until 
his  enlistment  in  the  Canadian  Mount- 
ed Rifles,  March  26,  1916.  With  them 
he  went  overseas,  transferring  in  "Eng- 
land to  the  Fort  Garry  Horse,  with 
which  unit  he  was  in  active  service  in 
France  from  December,  1916,  to  April, 
1919.  He  received  his  discharge  in 
Winnipeg,  Canada,  June  2,  1919.  For 
one  year  he  taught  in  the  Taber  High 
School  and  for  two  years  in  the  Knight 
Academy  in  Raymond,  Alberta.  He 
served  for  a  time   as   stake  superin- 


tendent of  the  M.  I.  A.  in  the  Taylor 
Stake. 

On  Dec.  21,  1921,  he  married  Ann 
Ella  Milner,  (daughter  of  Benjamin 
Franklin  Milner  and  Sarah  Ellen 
Kinsman),  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
To  them  have  been  born  two  sons  and 
three  daughters,  namely,  Marshall 
Gordon,  David  Milner,  Barbara,  Mari- 
lyn and  Joan. 

In  July,  1922,  Bro.  Bennett  and  his 
family  removed  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  he  attended  the  University  of 
Utah,  graduating  with  a  B.A.  degree 
in  1925,  and  receiving  his  Master's 
Degree  in  1926.  During  this  period 
he  was  regularly  employed  evenings 
in  the  registry  division  of  the  Salt 
Lake  Post  Office.  On  Oct.  9,  1927, 
he  was  oi'dained  a  Seventy  by  Melvin 
J.  Ballard.  Having  been  actively  en- 
gaged in  genealogical  research  for  a 
number  of  yeai's,  he  was  appointed 
secretary  of  the  Genealogical  Society 
of  Utah  Sept.  1,  1928,  which  position 
he  still  holds. 

CHRISTENSON,  Joseph,  secretary 
of  the  Genealogical  Society  of  Utah 
from  1900  to  1907,  librarian  from  1910 


to  1929,  and  vice-president  since  1934, 
was  born  April  19,  1865,  at  American 


682 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Fork,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Christenson  and  Johanna  Harling.  He 
is  recorder  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  607.) 

GRANT,   Heber   Jeddy,  one  of  the 

directors  of  the  Genealogical  Society 
of  Utah  from  1909  to  1919,  was  born 


Nov.  22,  1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Jedediah  M.  Grant  and  Ra- 
chel Ridgeway  Ivins.  He  became  pres- 
ident of  the  Church  Nov.  23,  1918. 
(Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  147;  Vol.  3,  p.  746) 

IVINS,  Anthony  W.,  vice-president 
of  the   Genealogical   Society  of  Utah 


from  1921  to  1925  and  pi-esident  from 
1925  to  1934,  was  born  Sept.  16,  1852, 
at  Toms  River,  Ocean  Co.,  New  Jer- 
sey. He  died  Sept.  23,  1934,  in  Salt 
Lake  City  as  a  member  of  the  First 
Presidency  of  the  Church.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  311;  Vol.  3,  p.  750.) 

JAQUES,  John,  librarian  and  as- 
sistant secretary  of  the  Genealogical 
Society  of  Utah  from  1894  to  1896  and 
secretary  from  1896  to  1900,  was  born 


Jan.  7,  1827,  at  Market  Bosworth, 
Leicestershire,  England,  a  son  of 
Thomas  Jaques  and  Mary  Ann  Heigh- 
ington.  A  song  writer  of  no  mean 
ability,  as  is  witnessed  by  his  im- 
mortal hymn  "O  Say  What  is  Truth," 
Elder  Jaques  was  assistant  Church 
Historian  from  1889  to  1900,  and  wrote 
the  most  consistent  history  of  the  hand- 
cart episode  of  1856  ever  written.  He 
died  June  1,  1900,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  254.) 

JENSON,  Andrew,  a  member  of  the 
board  of  directors  of  the  Genealogical 
Society  of  Utah  from  1894  to  1896, 
was  born  Dec.  11,  1850,  in  Torslev 
parish,  Hjorring  amt,  Denmark,  a  son 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


683 


of  Christian  Jensen  and  Kirsten  An- 
dersen.    He  holds  the  position  of  As- 


2,  1921,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  as  a 
member  of  the  First  Presidency  of 
the  Church.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  161;  Vol.  3,  p.  753.) 

LUND,  A  William,  a  director  since 
1925,  was  born  Aug.  10,  1886,  at  Eph- 
raim,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  An- 


sistant    Church    Historian.    (See    Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  261;  Vol.  2,  p.  542.) 

LUND,  Anthon  H.,  president  of  the 
Genealogical    Society    of    Utah    from 


thon  H.  Lund  and  Sarah  Ann  Peterson, 
He  is  Assistant  Church  Historian.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  754.) 

McAllister,   Duncan   M.,  one  of 

the  directors  of  the  Genealogical  So- 


1900  to  1921,  was  born  May  15,  1844, 
in  Aalborg,  Denmark,  and  died  March 


684 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ciety  of  Utah  from  1908  to  1917,  was 
born  April  18,  1842,  in  Glasgow,  Scot- 
land, and  died  May  15,  1931,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  holding  the  office  of  a 
Patriarch.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 
651.) 

MUSSER,  Amos  Milton,  treasurer 
of  the  Genealogical  Society  of  Utah 
from  1894  to  1909  and  vice-president 
of    that    organization    from    1907    to 


1909,  was  born  May  20,  1830,  in  Done- 
gal township,  Lancaster  Co.,  Pennsyl- 
vania, and  died  Sept.  24,  1909,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  381;  Vol.  3,  p.  765.) 

MORTON,  William  A.,  secretary  of 
the  Genealogical  Society  of  Utah  fi'or.i 
1923  to  1924,  was  born  in  Banbridge, 
L-eland,  Jan.  19,  1866,  a  son  of  Solo- 
mon Morton  and  Sarah  McGill.  In 
1888  he  heard  the  gospel  through  a 
fellow  workman  in  a  printing  estab- 
lishment and  emigrated  to  Utah  with 
his  family  in  1899.  He  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain  in  1906-1909  with 
Pres.   Heber   J.    Grant   and    acted   as 


assistant  editor  of  the  "Millennial 
Star."  He  filled  a  second  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1921-1923  with  Pres. 
George  Albert  Smith  and  again  acted 
as  assistant  editor  of  the  "Millennial 
Star."  Upon  his  return  in  1923  he 
was  appointed  secretary  of  the  Gen- 
ealogical Society  and  editor  of  the 
"Utah  Genealogical  and  Historical 
Magazine."  He  was  released  from 
this  position  in  1924  to  become  field 
secretary  of  religion  classes  and  was 
the  author  of  a  number  of  articles 
and  of  several  books  for  children,  the 
most  popular  of  these  being  "Mother 
Stories  of  the  Book  of  Mormon," 
"From  Ploughboy  to  Prophet"  and 
"Life  of  Christ  for  Little  Children." 
Bro.  Morton  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
June  18,  1930,  survived  by  his  wife 
and  several  children, 

NICHOLSON,  John,  vice-president 
of  the  Genealogical  Society  of  Utah 
from  1894  to  1907,  was  born  July  13, 
1830,  at  St.  Boswell,  Roxburgh,  Scot- 
land, a  son  of  John  Nicholson  and 
Elizabeth  Hewison.  He  was  baptized 
April  8,  1861,  in  Edinburgh,  by  Elder 
Robert  Hogg.  From  1863  to  1866  he 
labored  as  a  missionary  in  England, 
presiding  part  of  the  time  over  the 
Birmingham  Conference.  He  emigrat- 
ed to  Utah  in  September,  1866,  and 
from  1878  to  1880  filled  another  mis- 
sion in  England,  acting  as  associate 
editor  of  the  "Millennial  Star."  For 
many  years  he  was  associate  editor 
of  the  "Desex'et  News"  and  was  at  one 
time  also  connected  with  the  "Juve- 
nile Instructor."  He  was  a  forceful 
writer  and  among  the  works  of  his 
pen  ai'e  many  poetical  productions  of 
high  merit,  including  the  hymns  "The 
Nations  Bow  to  Satan's  Thrall," 
"While  of  These  Emblems  We  Par- 
take," etc.  For  several  years  previ- 
ous to  his  demise  he  worked  as  a  re- 
corder in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple.  Elder 
Nicholson  died  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  Jan.  25,  1909,  survived  by  his 
wife,  three  sons  and  six  daughters. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


685 


PENROSE,  Charles  W.,  vice-presi- 
dent of  the  Genealogical  Society  of 
Utah  from  1909  to  1921  and  president 


ogical  Society  of  Utah  from  1894  to 
1909,  was  born  Jan.  1,  1842,  in  Mary- 
lebone,  London,  England,  a  son  of 
George  Reynolds  and  Julia  Ann  Tautz, 


of  that  organization  from  1921  to 
1925,  was  born  Feb.  4,  1832,  at  Cam- 
berwell,  London,  England.  He  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City  May  16,  1925,  as  a 
member  of  the  First  Presidency  of  the 
Church.  (Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  256; 
Vol.  3,  769.) 

PERKES,  William  Henry,  assistant 
secretary  and  librarian  of  the  Gen- 
ealogical Society  of  Utah  from  1896 
to  1900,  was  born  at  Dudley,  Worces- 
tershire, England,  a  son  of  Henry 
Perkes  and  Charlotte  Lowe.  He  joined 
the  Church  in  1851  and  was  called  to 
work  in  the  business  office  of  the 
headquarters  of  the  British  Mission 
at  Liverpool  in  1856.  He  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1865  and  became  a  book- 
keeper in  the  "Deseret  News"  office 
under  the  direction  of  George  Q.  Can- 
non. He  was  an  ardent  genealogist 
and  an  efficient  aid  in  the  Genealog- 
ical Society  of  Utah  from  1896  to  his 
death,  which  occurred  in  Salt  Lake 
City  June  5,  1900.  He  was  survived 
by  his  wife  and  six  children. 

REYNOLDS,  George,  a  member  of 
the  board  of  directors  of  the  Geneal- 


and  died  Aug.  9,  1909,  in  Salt  Lake 
City  as  one  of  the  First  Council  of 
Seventies.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 
206;  Vol.  3,  p.  771.) 

RICHARDS,  Franklin  Dewey,  pres- 
ident of  the   Genealogical   Society  of 


686 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Utah  from  1894  to  1899,  was  born 
April  2,  1821,  in  Richmond,  Berkshire 
Co.,  Mass.,  and  died  Dec.  9,  1899,  in 
Ogden,  Utah,  as  one  of  the  Twelve 
Apostles.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 
115.) 

SUMMERHAYS,  Richard  B.,  sec- 
retary of  the  Genealogical  Society 
of  Utah  from  1924  to  1928,  was  born 
Oct.  17,  1887,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  a  son 
of  Jos.  W.  Summerhays  and  Sarah 
Berrett.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  4,  1895, 
by  W.  E.  Langford.  On  Aug.  5,  1905, 
he  was  set  ap?irt  by  Elder  George  A. 
Smith  for  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States,  from  which  he  returned  in 
June,  1907.  After  his  return  he  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  and  became  a 
member  of  the  105th  Quorum  of  Sev- 
enty. 

SMITH,  Hyrum  Gibbs,  a  director 
from  1917  to  1932,  was  born  July  8, 
1879,  in  South  Jordan,  Salt  Lake  Co., 


Utah  since  1934,  was  secretary  of  that 
organization  from  1907  to  1922,  treas- 


Utah,  a  son  of  Hyrum  Fisher  Smith 
and  Annie  M.  Gibbs.  He  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  Feb.  4,  1932,  as  the 
Presiding  Patriarch  of  the  Church. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  778.) 

SMITH,  Joseph  Fielding,  jun.,  pres- 
ident of  the  Genealogical   Society  of 


urer  since  1909,  and  vice-president 
from  1925  to  1934.  He  was  born  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  July  19,  1876, 
a  son  of  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Julina 
Lambson,  and  is  a  member  of  the 
Council  of  Twelve  Apostles,  and 
Church  Historian.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  3,  p.  784.) 

WIDTSOE,  John  A.,  one  of  the  di- 
rectors of  the  Genealogical  Society  of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


687 


Utah  since  1921,  was  born  Jan.  31, 
1872,  on  the  island  of  Froen,  Trond- 
hjem  amt,  Norway,  a  son  of  John 
Andreas  Widtsoe  and  Anna  Karine 
Gaarden.  He  is  a  member  of  the 
Council  of  Twelve  Apostles.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  783;  Vol.  3,  p.  735.) 

WILLIS,    George    H.,    one    of    the 

Board  of  Directors  of  the  Genealog- 
ical Society  of  Utah  from  1900  to  1909, 
still  resides  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
but  is  in  a  poor  state  of  health. 


*> «lc<'^*^^l^■ <♦ 

Zion's  Camp 

Under  the  above  title  we  publish  a 
few  brief  sketches  of  some  of  the 
members  of  Zion's  Camp  who  made  the 
famous  overland  journey  from  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  to  Clay  County,  Missouri, 
in  1834.  Other  sketches  have  already 
been  published  in  the  1st,  2nd,  and 
3rd  volume  of  the  Encyclopedia,  while 
many  others  are  not  ready  for  publi- 
cation. 

BARLOW,  Israel,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Sept.  13,  1806, 
in  Granville,  Hampden  Co.,  Mass.,  a 
son  of  Jonathan  and  Annis  Barlow. 
He  came  to  Utah  and  selected  his 
farm  in  West  Bountiful  in  October, 
1848,  moving  his  family  there  for  the 
summer  of  1849,  and  permanently  lo- 
cated there  in  1850.  Bro.  Barlow  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch  by  Wilford 
Woodruff  in  1882.  He  died  Nov.  1, 
1883,  in  West  Bountiful.  He  was  the 
first  nurseryman  in  Davis  County, 
Utah. 

BARNEY,  Edson,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  June  30,  1806, 
in  Jefferson  County,  New  York,  a  son 
of  Royal  and  Rachel  Barney.  He 
migrated  to  Amherst,  Ohio,  with  his 
parents  when  a  young  man  and  was 
baptized  by  Simeon  Carter  in  May, 
1831,  at  that  place.     He  first  saw  the 


Prophet  Joseph  Smith  at  a  conference 
held  in  January,  1832,  went  to  Mis- 
souri as  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp  in 
1834,  and  came  to  the  "Valley"  in 
1852,  settling  in  Provo.  He  filled  a 
mission  to  Las  Vegas  in  1855,  and 
another  mission  to  the  White  Moun- 
tains in  1858,  and  was  one  of  the  mis- 
sionaries in  1861  to  St.  George,  Utah, 
where  he  resided  until  his  last  sick- 
ness. He  died  Feb.  2,  1905,  in  Provo, 
Utah. 

BURGESS,  Harrison,  a  member  of  ^ 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Sept,  3,  1814, 
in  Putnam,  Washington  Co.,  N.  Y., 
a  son  of  William  Burgess.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  1,  1832,  filled  a  mission 
to  Vermont  in  1833,  went  to  Missouri 
with  Zion's  Camp  in  1834,  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  Feb.  28,  1835,  by 
Sidney  Rigdon,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  England  before  coming  to  the 
"Valley."  In  1862  he  was  called  to 
the  Southern  Utah  Mission  and  set- 
tled in  Pine  Valley.  There  he  acted 
as  a  counselor  to  Bishop  Wm.  Snow, 
and  after  the  death  of  Bishop  Snow, 
acted  as  Bishop  for  a  short  time.  He 
died  Feb.  10,  1883,  in  Pine  Valley, 
Utah. 

CAHOON,  William  F.,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Nov.  7,  1813, 
in  Harpersfield,  Ashtabula  Co.,  Ohio, 
a  son  of  Reynolds  Cahoon  and  Thirza 
Stiles.  He  came  with  his  parents  to 
Kirtland  in  1825,  and  heard  the  Elders 
(Oliver  Cowdery,  Parley  P.  Pratt  and 
others)  preach  the  gospel.  He  was 
baptized  Oct.  16,  1830,  by  Parley  P. 
Pratt,  was  ordained  a  Priest  and  filled 
a  mission  to  the  States  of  Ohio,  Penn- 
sylvania and  New  York  in  1832-1833, 
filled  another  mission  in  1833,  and  in 
1834  went  to  Missouri  with  Zion's 
Camp,  returning  to  Kirtland  Nov.  17, 
1834.  When  the  first  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty was  organized  the  following 
sprmg  he  was  ordained  a  member  of 
that  quorum.    He  labored  on  the  Kirt- 


688 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


land  Temple  until  that  building  was 
completed  in  1836,  married  Nancy  Ma- 
rinda  Gibbs,  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
performing  the  ceremony.  On  Feb. 
15,  1846,  he  crossed  the  Mississippi 
River  and  joined  the  companies  of 
saints  on  Sugar  Creek,  arriving  in 
the  "Valley"  Sept.  24,  1849.  He  died 
April  6,  1883,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

CHIDESTER,     John     Maddison,     a 

member  of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Jan. 
22,  1809,  in  Pompey,  Onondaga  Co., 
N.  Y.,  a  son  of  John  P.  Chidester  and 
Polly  Gifford.  He  was  baptized  in 
June,  1832,  in  Michigan,  by  Joseph 
Wood;  joined  the  Church  in  the  spring 
of  1832,  and  left  Michigan,  where  he 
was  baptized,  to  join  Zion's  Camp. 
He  effected  a  junction  with  the  camp 
some  sixty  miles  from  Kirtland  and 
passed  through  all  the  vicissitudes  of 
that  memorable  march.  He  settled 
with  the  saints  in  Missouri,  filled  a 
mission  to  Michigan  in  1842,  and  when 
the  saints  were  expelled  from  Nauvoo, 
Brother  Chidester  built  and  ran  a  fer- 
ry boat  across  the  Mississippi  River. 
In  1851  he  arrived  in  Utah,  moved  to 
Spanish  Fork  in  1853,  spent  the  win- 
ter of  1858-1859  in  Parley's  Park,  and 
in  1859  moved  to  Salt  Lake  City, 
where  he  lived  in  the  16th  Ward  until 
1862,  when  he  was  called  to  Dixie. 
He  died  Aug.  30,  1893,  in  Washington, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah. 

CHIDESTER,  John  Peck,  a  member 
of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Dec.  23, 
1831,  in  Somerfield  township,  Monroe 
County,  Michigan.  Arriving  in  Utah 
with  a  company  of  saints  about  1848, 
he  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of 
Spanish  Fork.  He  was  commissioned 
as  a  captain  in  the  Nauvoo  Legion 
and  participated  in  the  Walker  Indian 
War  of  1853.  He  married  Susan  Foy 
Oct.  23,  1851,  and  moved  with  his 
family  to  Southern  Utah  in  1862,  set- 
tling at  Washington,  where  he  lived 
until  his  death  which  occurred  Jan. 
10,  1897. 


CLEMENTS,  Ada,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Dec.  24,  1801, 
in  Hebron,  New  York,  a  daughter  of 
Justice  and  Eve  Winchell.  She  was 
married  to  Albert  Clements  Jan.  28, 
1822,  at  Fort  Ann;  joined  the  Church 
soon  after  her  marriage  and  passed 
through  the  Missouri  persecutions,  to- 
gether with  her  husband.  She  came 
to  Utah  in  1852,  with  her  children, 
while  her  husband  remained  in  the 
states  till  1872,  when  he  joined  his 
family  in  Utah.  Sister  Clements  died 
at  Oxford,  Bingham  Co.,  Idaho,  March 
4,  1890.  She  was  the  mother  of  nine 
children. 

CLEMENTS,  Albert,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  March  19, 
1801,  in  Fort  Ann,  New  York,  a  son 
of  James  Clements.  He  came  to  Flor- 
ence, Ohio,  in  1833,  in  company  with 
Alanson  Ripley;  remained  there  till 
the  beginning  of  May,  1834,  and  as  he 
wanted  to  come  to  Missouri  anyway 
with  his  family,  he  joined  Mile  An- 
drus,  and  proceeded  to  Missouri,  and 
passed  through  all  the  persecutions 
in  Missouri  with  the  other  Latter-day 
Saints.  He  joined  Zion's  Camp  at 
Mansfield,  Ohio,  May  10,  1834,  and 
became  a  member  of  Orson  Hyde's 
company.  In  1852  his  family  came  to 
Utah  where  he  joined  them  in  1872. 
He  died  April  9,  1882,  in  Springville, 
Utah,  as  a  faithful  member  of  the 
Church. 

COLBY,  Alanson,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  May  9,  1811,  in 
Vermont,  a  son  of  Abner  and  Cynthia 
Colby.  He  was  converted  to  "Mor- 
monism"  in  Michigan  in  1834,  and 
started  from  Oakland  County,  in  that 
state,  in  company  with  Hyrum  Smith, 
Lyman  Curtis,  and  others  who  joined 
the  main  company  of  Zion's  Camp  at 
Salt  River,  Missouri,  in  June,  1834. 
Bro.  Colby  passed  through  the  per- 
secutions in  Missouri  with  the  rest  of 
the  saints,  being  expelled  from  that 
state  in  1839.    After  he  had  made  his 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


689 


own  escape  from  Missouri  he  went 
back  and  helped  another  family  to  re- 
move to  Illinois.  After  sharing  in 
the  troubles  in  Illinois  he  migrated  to 
the  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  the  fall 
of  1848.  His  death  occurred  Feb.  19, 
1875,  in  Utah,  he  having  been  a  faith- 
ful member  of  the  Church.  He  left  a 
widow,  Fanny  Colby,  and  a  sister,  Hul- 
dah  C.  Teeples. 

COONS,  Libeus  T.,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  May  13,  1807, 
He  became  a  convert  to  "Mormonism" 
in  the  early  days  of  the  Church,  short- 
ly after  which  he  was  blessed  and  set 
apart  by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  to 
nurse  the  sick,  to  whom  he  often 
brought  great  blessings  and  comfort. 
As  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp  he  trav- 
eled to  Missouri  in  1834,  and  when 
the  first  (luorum  of  Seventy  was  or- 
ganized in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in  1835,  he 
was  chosen  as  one  of  its  members.  He 
passed  through  the  persecutions  of 
the  saints  in  Missouri  and  Illinois, 
where  he  was  chosen  to  be  a  member 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith's  life- 
guard, and  always  showed  himself 
faithful  to  -the  Church.  After  his  ar- 
rival in  Utah,  he  resided  in  a  number 
of  places  and  finally  died  at  Richfield, 
Utah,  July  7,  1872,  leaving  a  wife, 
and  a  numerous  family  of  children. 
He  was  a  kind  father,  neighbor  and 
friend. 

CURTIS,  Lyman,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Jan.  21,  1812, 
in  New  Salem,  Franklin  Co.,  Mass.,  a 
son  of  Nahum  Curtis  and  Millicent 
Wait.  He  was  baptized  in  Michigan, 
about  the  year  1833,  visited  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  in  1833,  went  back  to  Michigan, 
about  the  year  1833,  visited  Kirtland, 
and  in  1834  he  and  eighteen  others 
were  called  upon  by  Hyrum  Smith  and 
Lyman  Wight  to  join  Zion's  Camp  and 
go  with  that  company  to  Missouri. 
After  traveling  about  one  thousand 
miles  they  joined  the  main  camp  June 
8,  1834.     In  February,  1835,  he  mar- 


ried Charlotte  Alvord.  His  mother 
died  Sept.  3,  1838,  in  Caldwell  County, 
Mo.  During  this  time  land  had  been 
purchased  from  the  Government, 
houses  were  built  and  the  comforts 
of  life  were  beginning  to  be  enjoyed, 
when  in  the  fall  of  1838  a  mob  drove 
them  from  their  homes.  His  father 
died  March  11,  1846,  in  Nauvoo,  and 
Bro.  Lyman  Curtis  arrived  in  Salt 
Lake  Valley  with  the  original  Pio- 
neers July  22,  1847.  He  went  back 
in  the  fall  of  1847  with  Brigham 
Young's  company,  coming  back  to  the 
Valley  with  his  family  in  1850.  In 
1853  he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Indians 
of  southern  Utah,  and  while  thus  en- 
gaged assisted  in  raising  the  first  cot- 
ton which  was  raised  in  Utah.  He 
died  Aug.  6,  1898,  in  Salem,  Utah 
County,  Utah. 

HUBBARD,      Marshall     Moore,     a 

member  of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born 
June  18,  1805,  in  Windsor  County, 
Vermont,  a  son  of  John  and  Elizabeth 
Hubbard.  He  married  Caroline  Eliza 
Nickerson  in  Dayton,  N.  Y.,  Sept.  18, 
1829,  was  baptized  in  June,  1833,  by 
Amasa  M.  Lyman,  and  went  to  Mis- 
souri in  Zion's  Camp  in  1834.  He  was 
stricken  with  cholera,  ^  bereft  of  his 
speech  and  hearing  and  finally  of  all 
sense,  when  the  Prophet  Joseph  com- 
manded Father  Freeman  Nickerson  to 
administer  to  him.  He  was  healed, 
but  was  very  feeble.  In  the  autumn 
of  1836  he  exchanged  his  farm  and 
other  property  for  land  in  Michigan 
and  removed  to  that  state.  There  he 
took  sick  with  bilious  fever,  and  died 
Sept.  18,  1838,  after  two  weeks  of 
suffering. 

HUMPHREY,  Solomon,  a  member 
of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Sept.  23, 
1775,  a  descendant  of  the  Connecticut 
family  of  Humphreys.  His  son,  Lu- 
ther Humphrey,  was  born  in  Glover, 
Vermont,  in  1808.  Bro.  Solomon  Hum- 
phrey, converted  by  Don  Carlos  Smith, 
was   ordained  an   Elder   as   early   as 


Vol.  IV,  No.  44 


October  SI.  1936 


690 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


June,  1831.  Being  called  on  a  mis- 
sion by  revelation  June  7,  1831,  we 
find  him  baptizing  people  the  follow- 
ing year.  He  was  a  member  of  Zion's 
Camp  in  1834,  and  when  volunteer 
missionaries  were  called  for  in  Au- 
gust, 1834,  he  proffered  his  services 
to  preach.  In  the  "History  of  Joseph 
Smith"  under  date  of  May  27,  1834, 
the  following  is  recorded:  "This  after- 
noon, Elder  Solomon  Humphrey,  an 
aged  brother  of  the  camp  (Zion's 
Camp)  having  become  exceedingly 
weary,  lay  down  on  the  prairie  to  rest 
himself  and  fell  asleep.  When  he 
awoke,  he  saw,  coiled  up,  within  one 
foot  of  his  head,  a  rattlesnake  lying 
between  him  and  his  hat,  which  he 
had  in  his  hand  when  he  fell  asleep. 
The  brethren  gathered  around  him 
saying:  'It  is  a  rattlesnake,  let  us 
kill  it;'  but  Bro.  Humphrey  said  'No, 
I  will  protect  him,  you  cannot  hurt 
him,  for  he  and  I  have  had  a  good  nap 
together.'  "  He  died  in  Clay  County, 
Missouri,  in  September,  1834. 

JOHNSON,  Seth  Gurnsey,  a  mem- 
ber of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Feb.  14, 
1805,  in  Royalton,  Mass.,  a  son  of 
Ezekiel  Johnson  and  Julia  Hills.  He 
was  well  educated,  held  the  office  of 
an  Elder  in  the  Church  and  had  la- 
bored as  a  missionary.  He  died  Feb. 
19,  1835,  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  of  con- 
sumption, while  teaching  school  at 
Willoughby. 

McBRIDE,  Reuben,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  June  16,  1803, 
in  Chester,  Washington  Co.,  N.  Y., 
the  son  of  Daniel  and  Abigail  Mc- 
Bride.  In  1833  (June  16)  he  married 
Ann  Anderson,  was  baptized  March 
4,  1834,  Joseph  Smith  the  Prophet  and 
Parley  P.  Pratt  being  honored  guests 
at  Bro.  McBride's  house  on  the  day  of 
his  baptism  and  held  a  meeting,  at 
which  the  Prophet  called  for  volun- 
teers to  go  up  and  redeem  Zion.  The 
new  convert  was  one  of  the  first  to 
respond  to  the  call,  and  he  marched 


to  Missouri  With  Zion's  Camp.  He  re- 
turned to  Kirtland,  and  upon  the  exo- 
dus of  the  saints  from  that  place  was 
left  in  charge  of  the  Temple  and  other 
property  there.  He  was  the  first  man 
baptized  for  the  dead  in  the  Temple 
at  Nauvoo,  and  came  to  Utah  in  1850. 
He  returned  to  Kirtland  in  the  fall  of 
1851,  and  brought  his  family  west, 
spending  the  winter  of  1852  in  Spring- 
ville,  Utah.  He  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  England  and  crossed  the  Plains 
with  the  missionary  handcart  com- 
pany in  1857;  he  returned  in  1858,  on 
account  of  the  Johnston  Army  trou- 
bles, and  later  (in  1867)  returned  to 
England  and  labored  as  a  missionary 
in  the  Nottingham  Conference.  From 
1877  to  1824,  he  served  as  a  member 
of  the  Millard  Stake  High  Council, 
where  his  patience,  and  peaceful,  un- 
assuming disposition  mad^  all  who 
knew  him  his  friends.  He  died  Feb. 
26,  1891,  in  Fillmore,  Utah,  survived 
by  his  wife  and  six  children,  three 
children  having  died  previously.  He 
left  fifty  grand-children  and  thirty 
great  grand-children  to  revere  his 
memory  and  emulate  his  faith  in  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 

NICKERSON,  Freeman,  a  member 
of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Feb.  5,  1778, 
in  South  Dennis,  Mass.,  a  son  of  Elea- 
zer  Nickerson  and  Thankful  Chase. 
He  married  Huldah  Chapman  Jan.  19, 
1801,  and  they  had  nine  children.  Be- 
coming a  convert  to  "Mormonism"  at 
Dayton,  New  York,  he  was  baptized 
in  April,  1833,  by  Zerubbabel  Snow. 
His  first  mission  was  among  the 
saints  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in  September, 
1833.  After  that  he  took  the  Prophet 
Joseph  and  Sidney  Rigdon  in  his  car- 
riage to  Upper  Canada  and  labored 
among  the  people  at  Mount  Pleasant, 
where  a  branch  of  the  Church  was  or- 
ganized with  13  members  and  Eleazer 
F.  Nickerson  as  president.  He  filled 
several  missions  to  the  States  and 
Canada,  was  one  of  the  early  settlers 
of   Commerce,    Illinois,    and    later   of 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


691 


Nauvoo.  Being  driven  from  his  home 
in  Nauvoo,  he  died  Jan.  22,  1847,  at 
the  Chariton  River,  Iowa,  near  the 
Pioneer  crossing,  aged  about  69  years. 

NICKERSON,     Levi     Stillman,     a 

member  of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born 
April  2,  1814,  in  Springville,  Susque- 
hanna Co.,  Penn.,  a  son  of  Freeman 
Nickerson  and  Huldah  Chapman.  He 
was  baptized  in  June,  1833,  by  Amasa 
M,  Lyman,  went  to  Missouri  in  1834 
with  Zion's  Camp,  and  returned  to 
Ohio  in  August  following.  In  the  fall 
of  1835  he  attended  the  School  of  the 
Prophets  at  Kirtland  and  was  ordained 
to  the  Priesthood.  During  the  winter 
of  1838-1839,  he  assisted  in  moving 
the  saints  from  Missouri  when  they 
were  driven  out  by  Gov.  Boggs.  He 
visited  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and 
others  when  they  were  in  prison  in 
Liberty  jail.  In  June,  1840,  he  mar- 
ried Mary  Ann  Neymon  and  filled  a 
mission  to  Peoria,  Illinois,  the  same 
year.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  of 
Nauvoo,  crossed  the  plains  to  Utah 
in  1850,  and  in  1852  started  on  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain.  His  suffer- 
ings on  the  journey  were  extreme,  ow- 
ing to  the  severity  of  the  weather,  and 
he  arrived  at  Kanesville,  Iowa,  quite 
crippled.  He  remained  in  that  vicin- 
ity until  December,  1853,  when  he  was 
found  dead  in  his  tent  by  some  of  his 
friends.  Bro,  Nickerson  was  the  fa- 
ther of  six  children. 

NOBLE,  Joseph  Bates,  a  member 
of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Jan.  14, 
1810,  in  Egremont,  Berkshire  Co., 
Mass.,  a  son  of  Ezekiel  Bates  and 
Theodotia  Bates.  He  was  converted 
to  "Mormonism"  in  1832;  went  to 
Missouri  as  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp 
in  1834;  married  Mary  Adeline  Bee- 
man  Sept.  11,  1837;  attended  the  Eld- 
ers' school  in  Kirtland;  was  chosen  a 
member  of  the  first  quorum  of  Sev- 
enty; witnessed  glorious  manifesta- 
tions of  the  power  of  God  in  the  Kirt- 
land Temple;  went  to  Missouri  where 


he  passed  through  the  persecutions 
of  the  saints;  located  in  Commerce 
(Nauvoo),  where  he  was  miraculously 
healed  from  a  severe  attack  of  sick- 
ness through  the  administrations  of 
the  Prophet  Joseph;  ordained  a  High 
Priest  and  appointed  to  act  as  Bishop 
of  the  Nauvoo  Fifth  Ward;  acted  as 
one  of  the  Prophet's  body  guard;  act- 
ed as  a  Bishop  in  Winter  Quarters; 
came  west  in  1846  and  followed  the 
Pioneers  to  the  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
the  fall  of  1847;  acted  as  first  coun- 
selor to  Bishop  Edward  Hunter  of 
the  Salt  Lake  City  13th  Ward;  moved 
to  Bountiful,  in  1862;  acted  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Davis  Stake  High  Council 
and  performed  a  mission  to  the  United 
States  in  1872.  He  died  Aug.  17,  1900, 
in  Wardboro,  Bear  Lake  Co.,  Idaho. 

SNOW,  Zerubbabel,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  March  29,  1809, 
in  St.  Johnsbury,  Caledonia  Co.,  Ver- 
mont, a  son  of  Levi  Snow  and  Lucina 
Streeter.  Hearing  the  Gospel  preached 
by  Elders  Orson  Pratt  and  Lyman  E. 
Johnson  in  Vermont,  Elder  Snow  was 
baptized  in  1832,  went  to  Ohio,  where 
he  met  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith  July 
14,  1834.  In  the  spring  of  1833  Elder 
Snow  returned  to  Vermont,  and  re- 
mained there  until  April,  1834,  when 
he  went  to  Ohio,  joined  Zion's  Camp 
and  traveled  to  Missouri;  he  acted  as 
commissary  of  the  Camp.  In  the 
spring  of  1836  the  family  sold  their 
property  in  Vermont  and  made  their 
home  in  Kirtland;  from  there  they 
went  to  Iowa,  and  from  there  to  Utah. 
Elder  Snow  was  elected  Attorney  Gen- 
eral of  Utah  Territory,  Feb.  19,  1869. 
He  died  Sept.  27,  1888,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah. 

TANNER,  Nathan,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  May  14,  1815, 
in  Greenwich,  New  York,  a  son  of 
John  Tanner  and  Lydia  Stewart.  He 
was  baptized  Sept.  10,  1831,  when  16 
years  of  age,  and  only  a  boy  of  19 
when  he  was  called  by  the  Prophet 
Joseph  to  join  Zion's  Camp.     He  per- 


692 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


formed  his  duties  in  the  camp  with 
integrity,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  Oct. 
10,  1835,  and  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Eastern  States  in  company  with  Elder 
Amasa  M.  Lyman.  While  on  that 
mission  he  married  Rachel  Winter, 
June  30,  1836,  at  Bolton,  N.  Y.  He 
returned  with  his  wife  to  Kirtland  in 
the  fall  of  1836,  and  came  to  the  "Val- 
ley" in  the  fall  of  1848.  Bro.  Tanner 
was  influential  in  dealing  with  the 
Indians,  and  also  had  his  share  of 
missionary  experience  and  was  a  "min- 
ute man"  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the 
word.  He  died  Dec.  17,  1910,  at  the 
age  of  95  years,  in  Granger,  Salt  Lake 
Co.,  Utah,  as  the  last  survivor  of 
Zion's   Camp. 

WINCHESTER,  Benjamin,  a  mem- 
ber of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born  Aug.  6, 
1817,  in  Erie  County,  Pennsylvania,  a 
son  of  Stephen  Winchester.  He  was 
baptized  in  February,  1833,  in  Erie, 
Pa.,  moved  to  Kirtland  in  the  fall  of 
1833,  and  joined  Zion's  Camp  in  1834 
and  marched  to  Missouri.  He  returned 
to  Kirtland,  filled  a  mission  in  1837, 
with  Jedediah  M.  Grant  and  others  as 
companions,  filled  other  missions 
later  and  baptized  over  eight  hundred 
persons.  He  raised  up  a  branch  of 
five  hundi'ed  members  in  Philadelphia. 

WINCHESTER,  Stephen,  a  member 
of  Zion's  Camp,  was  born  May  8,  1795, 
in  Vershire,  Orange  Co.,  Vermont,  a 
son  of  Benjamin  Winchester  and  Be- 
thia  Adams.  He  was  baptized  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1833,  in  Erie  County,  Penn., 
moved  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in  the  spring 
of  1834,  where  he  joined  Zion's  Camp, 
in  which  he  acted  as  captain  of  a  com- 
pany on  the  journey  to  Missouri.  After 
the  Camp  was  disbanded,  he  returned 
to  Kirtland,  -and  then  removed  to  Mis- 
souri in  1837,  settling  on  the  prairie 
south  of  Far  West,  where  he  lived  un- 
til the  saints  were  expelled  in  1839. 
David  W.  Patten  died  at  his  home 
after  the  battle  on  Crooked  River. 
Elder  Winchester  shared  in  the  per- 
secutions in  Illinois  in   1846,  and  re- 


mained at  Winter  Quarters  till  1849, 
when  he  came  to  Utah,  settling  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  remained 
until  his  death,  which  occurred  Jan. 
1,  1873.  Bro.  Winchester  was  a  man 
of  industrious  habits,  excellent  char- 
acter and  of  firm  and  unwavering 
faith  in  the  gospel. 

WINTERS,  Hiram,  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp,  was  born  April  5,  1805, 
near  Westfield,  Washington  Co.,  N.  Y. 
He  removed  with  his  parents  to  Sen- 
eca County  and  afterwards  settled  in 
Jamestown,  N.  Y.,  where  he  married 
Rebecca  Burdick.  He  was  baptized  by 
Lyman  Sherman  in  June,  1833,  and  in 
the  fall  of  that  year  moved  to  Kirt- 
land, Ohio.  The  next  year  he  joined 
Zion's  Camp  and  marched  to  Missouri, 
acting  as  cook  of  the  second  Ten  of 
that  organization  until  the  camp  ar- 
rived at  Salt  Creek,  Mo.,  where  he 
was  appointed  to  serve  in  the  second 
company  of  rangers.  After  the  camp 
was  dissolved,  Bro.  Winters  returned 
to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  where  he  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  by  the  Prophet  Jos- 
eph Smith  Feb.  28,  1835,  being  the 
first  Seventy  ordained  in  this  dispen- 
sation. In  the  spring  of  1835,  he  was 
sent  on  a  mission  to  New  York,  was 
present  at  the  dedication  of  the  Kirt- 
land Temple  March  27,  1836,  and 
moved  to  Quincy,  III.,  in  1837,  later 
to  Commerce.  He  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  and  appointed  to  act  as 
a  counselor  to  Bishop  Thomas  Bur- 
dick. In  1845,  he  moved  his  family 
to  Nauvoo,  and  when  the  camps  of 
the  saints  moved  westward,  he  estab- 
lished himself  at  Burlington,  Iowa,  as 
a  shoemaker  and  a  builder  of  hydraul- 
ic cisterns.  Having  earned  sufficient 
means  to  buy  a  traveling  outfit,  he 
followed  the  Camps  of  Isi'ael  to  Kanes- 
ville,  Iowa,  in  1851,  and  arrived  in  the 
Valley  in  1852.  His  wife  died  while 
crossing  the  plains  and  was  buried 
near  Scott's  Bluffs  on  the  Platte  Riv- 
er.   He  died  Oct.  21,  1889. 

■* -no^^/^i- <« 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


693 


ORIGINAL  PIONEERS  OF  UTAH 

The  term  "Original  Pioneers  of 
Utah"  is  applied  to  the  company,  con- 
sisting of  143  men,  3  women  and  2 
children,  led  by  President  Brigham 
Young,  which  entered  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  July  21,  22  and  24,  1847. 

ADAMS,   Barnabas   L.,   one   of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  28,  1812,  near  Perth,  Upper  Can- 
ada. On  the  westward  journey  with 
the  pioneers  he  did  good  service  as 
captain  of  the  guard  at  night  and  at 
all  times  was  willing  to  help.  This 
was  particularly  the  case  when  a 
stream  had  to  be  forded,  as  he  had 
been  accustomed  to  river  work  when 
floating  logs  down  the  Mississippi 
River  from  Iowa  to  St.  Louis.  He 
furnished  timber  for  the  Salt  Lake 
Tabernacle,  the  theater  and  other  pub- 
lic buildings,  and  on  June  1,  1869, 
started  up  City  Creek  for  some  tan 
bark.  Before  leaving  he  had  strained 
his  chest  in  lifting  a  wagon  box  and 
was  seriously  ill  on  the  trip.  The  fol- 
lowing day  (June  2nd)  he  died  sud- 
denly at  his  home  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
leaving  a  wife  and  a  large  family. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  577.) 

ALLEN,  Rufus,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  March  22, 
1814,  in  Litchfield  County,  Conn.,  a 
son  of  Gideon  Allen  and  Rachel  Hand. 
He  returned  to  Winter  Quarters  with 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  the  same  fall 
and  after  his  arrival  in  the  Valley  a 
second  time  located  in  Ogden,  Weber 
County,  where  he  died  during  the  win- 
ter of  1888-1889.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
3,  p.  583.) 

ANGELL,  Truman  Osborn,  one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  June  5,  1810,  at  Providence,  R.  I. 
For  many  years  he  held  the  position 
of  Church  Architect  and  while  acting 
in  this  capacity  the  Salt  Lake  Temple, 
the  Tabernacle,  the  St.  George  Temple 


and  many  other  important  public 
buildings  were  erected.  At  the  time 
of  his  death  on  Oct.  16,  1887,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  he  held  the  office  of  a 
Patriarch. 

ATWOOD,  Millen,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  May 
24,  1817,  at  Wellington,  Conn.,  a  son 
of  Dan  Atwood  and  Polly  Sawyer.  For 
many  years  he  was  Bishop  of  the 
Thirteenth  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  and  while  acting  in  that  capac- 
ity he  died  Dec.  17,  1890,  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  633.) 

BADGER,  Rodney,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah  was  born  Feb. 
4,  1823,  at  Waterford,  Caledonia  Co., 
Vermont,  a  son  of  Rodney  Badger  and 
Lydia  Chamberlain.  He  acted  as  a 
counselor  in  the  bishopric  of  the  15th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  from  1851  to 
1853.  He  was  a  special  agent  of  the 
Perpetual  Emigrating  Fund  Company, 
a  member  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion  and 
served  as  deputy  sheriff  of  Salt  Lake 
County.  He  was  accidentally  drowned 
in  the  Weber  River  on  April  29,  1853, 
in  an  effort  to  save  the  lives  of  an 
emigrant  family,  en  route  to  Califor- 
nia. (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  592.) 

BAIRD,  Robert  Erwing,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
May  15,  1817,  in  Londonderry,  Ire- 
land, a  son  of  James  Baird  and  Eliza- 
beth Erwing.  He  located  in  Weber 
County,  served  as  a  justice  of  the 
peace  and  a  city  councilman  in  Ogden 
and  was  a  president  of  the  33rd  Quor- 
um of  Seventy.  He  acted  as  presiding 
Elder  of  the  Lynn  District  in  Weber 
County  and  died  at  Lynn,  Aug.  24, 
1875,  leaving  a  lai*ge  family. 

BARNEY,  Lewis,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 
8,  1808,  in  Niagara  County,  N.  Y.,  a 
son  of  Charles  Barney  and  Mercy 
Yeoman.  He  was  confirmed  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Church  by  the  Prophet  Jos- 


694 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


eph  Smith  after  being  baptized  in  the 
spring  of  1840.  He  migrated  with 
the  Saints  from  Nauvoo  to  Winter 
Quarters  and  after  his  arrival  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  became  noted  as  an 
Indian  fighter.  He  died  Nov.  5,  1894, 
at  Mancos,  Colorado,  leaving  a  large 
family.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  594.) 

BARNUM,   Charles   D.,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
May  9,  1800,  near  Brockville,  Leeds 
County,  Canada.  He  was  baptized  by 
John  E.  Page  in  1836,  resided  at  Nau- 
voo, where  he  quarried  rock  for  the 
Temple.  After  coming  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  with  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  he  returned  to  his  family  in 
Winter  Quarters,  but  they  refused  to 
accompany  him  west.  He  returned  to 
Utah  in  1850  and  acted  as  a  counselor 
in  the  bishopric  of  the  15th  Ward, 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  died  Sept.  9, 
1894.  He  was  the  father  of  ten  chil- 
dren, four  of  whom  survived  him.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  594.) 

BENSON,    Ezra    Taft,    one   of   the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  and  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Quorum  of  Twelve  Apos- 
tles at  the  time,  was  born  Feb.  ^, 
1811,  in  Mendon,  Worcester  County, 
Mass.,  a  son  of  John  Benson  and 
Chloe  Taft.  After  arriving  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  City  with  the  pioneer  com- 
pany in  July,  1847,  he  returned  to 
Winter  Quarters  in  the  fall  of  1847, 
with  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  and  was 
appointed  to  preside  over  the  saints 
in  Pottawattamie  County,  Iowa,  with 
Orson  Hyde  and  George  A.  Smith.  He 
returned  to  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
1849  and  served  as  a  member  of  the 
Provisional  Government  of  the  State 
of  Deseret  previous  to  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  Territory  of  Utah  and 
served  several  terms  as  a  member  of 
the  Utah  Territorial  Legislature.  He 
died  suddenly  in  Ogden,  Utah,  Sept.  3, 
1869,  leaving  a  large  family.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  99.) 


BILLINGS,   George   Pierce,   one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  July  25,  1827,  in  Kirtland,  Ohio. 
Soon  after  his  arrival  in  Salt  Lake 
Valley  he  went  to  California,  but  later, 
responding  to  a  call  from  the  Church, 
filled  a  mission  to  Carson  Valley,  Ne- 
vada. He  finally  made  his  residence 
in  Manti,  Utah,  where  he  died  Dec.  2, 
1896,  survived  by  a  large  family. 

BOGGS,  Francis,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  May 
17,  1807  in  Belmont,  Ohio,  a  son  of 
Alexander  Boggs  and  Hannah  Martin. 
He  was  baptized  May  17,  1841,  by  John 
Cairn  and  took  an  active  part  in  build- 
ing up  Nauvoo,  111.  He  resided  in 
Salt  Lake  City  for  some  time  and 
served  one  term  in  the  Utah  territorial 
legislature.  He  was  a  pioneer  of 
southern  Utah  and  lived  at  Washing- 
ton, Utah,  where  he  died  Jan.  22,  1889. 
His  wife,  Eveline  Martin,  bore  him 
eleven  children,  the  family  doing  much 
to  forward  a  number  of  pioneer  en- 
terprises in  Iron  and  Washington 
counties,  Utah.  (Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  322.) 

BROWN,   George   Washington,   one 

of  the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Jan.  25,  1827,  in  Newbury,  Cuya- 
hoga Co.,  Ohio,  a  son  of  Nathaniel 
Brown  and  Avis  Hill.  After  arriving 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  he  returned 
to  Winter  Quarters  with  Pres.  Brig- 
ham Young  and  came  again  to  Utah 
with  his  mother,  a  brother  and  a  sis- 
ter, in  1850.  Later  he  made  his  home 
at  Charleston,  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  by  Pres.  John  Taylor  and 
set  apart  as  an  officer  in  the  Was- 
atch Stake  of  Zion.  He  died  at  Charles- 
ton Dec.  20,  1906,  survived  by  a  large 
family.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  608.) 

BROWN,  John,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  23, 
1820,  in  Sumner  Co.,  Tennessee,  a  son 
of  John  Brown  and  Martha  Chipman. 
He  was   a   member   of  Orson   Pratt's 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


695 


advance  company  and  one  of  the  first 
of  the  pioneers  to  gaze  upon  the  wa- 
ters of  the  Great  Salt  Lake.  On  Feb. 
2,  1863,  he  was  ordained  a  Bishop  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  and  sent  to  pre- 
side over  the  Saints  at  Pleasant  Grove, 
Utah,  in  which  capacity  he  acted  for 
twenty-nine  years,  after  which  he  was 
ordained  a  Patriarch.  Bishop  Brown 
died  at  Pleasant  Grove  Nov.  4,  1897, 
survived  by  a  numei'ous  family.  (Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  511.) 

BROWN,  Nathaniel  Thomas,  one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  arrived 
in   Great   Salt   Lake   Valley    in   July, 

1847,  returned  to  Winter  Quarters 
with  Pres.  Brigham  Young  later  the 
same  year  and  was  accidentally  shot 
at  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa,  in  February, 

1848,  just  as  he  was  preparing  to  re- 
turn to  Salt  Lake  Valley  with  Presi- 
dent Young,  who  was  much  distressed 
by  the  tragedy  and  remai-ked  that 
Bro.  Brown's  old  shoes  were  worth 
more  than  the  whole  body  of  the  man 
who  killed  him. 

BULLOCK,  Thomas,  was  a  member, 
and  acted  as  clerk  of  the  original  com- 
pany of  Utah  pioneers.  He  was  born 
Dec.  23,  1816,  at  Leek,  Staffordshire, 
England,  a  son  of  Thomas  Bullock  and 
Mary  Hall.  On  the  pioneer  journey  he 
kept  a  faithful  record  of  events,  dis- 
tances traveled,  weather  conditions 
and  other  interesting  data  which  has 
made  his  journal  not  only  of  state  but 
of  national  importance.  When  publi- 
cation of  the  "Deseret  News"  was  com- 
menced in  1850,  Bro.  Bullock  was  an 
important  member  of  the  staff.  He 
was  chief  clerk  of  the  Utah  Territorial 
House  of  Representatives  for  several 
sessions  and  served  as  chief  clerk  in 
the  Historian's  Office  under  Willard 
Richards  and  George  A.  Smith,  church 
historians.  In  1868  Bro.  Bullock  lo- 
cated in  Summit  County,  Utah,  where 
he  served  as  clerk  of  the  probate  court 
and  recorder  of  said  county.  He  died 
at  Coalville,  Summit  County,  Feb.  10, 


1885,  survived  by  a  large  family.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  599.) 

BURK,   Charles    Allen,   one   of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Sept.  2,  1823,  in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  en- 
dured persecutions  with  the  saints  in 
Missouri,  was  forced  to  vacate  his 
home  in  Nauvoo  and  after  his  arrival 
in  the  Rocky  Mountains  was  active  in 
pioneer  enterprises.  He  died  at  Min- 
ersville,  Beaver  Co.,  Utah,  Feb.  26, 
1888. 

BURNHAM,  Jacob,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  remained  only 
a  short  time  with  the  saints  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley.  He  went  on  to 
California  where  he  died  in  1850. 

CARRINGTON,  Albert,  one  of  the 
original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  8,  1813,  at  Royalton,  Windsor  Co., 
Vermont,  a  son  of  Daniel  and  Isabella 
Carrington.  He  received  a  college 
education  and  joined  the  Church  in 
Wisconsin  in  1841,  After  his  arrival 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  he  held 
office  in  the  Provisional  Government 
of  the  State  of  Deseret  and  in  the 
territorial  government  of  Utah.  He 
was  one  of  the  early  editors  of  the 
"Deseret  News,"  and  on  July  3,  1870, 
was  set  apart  as  a  member  of  the 
Apostles  Quorum,  which  position  he 
held  until  Nov.  7,  1885,  when,  on  ac- 
count of  transgression,  he  was  for  a 
time,  disfellowshipped.  He,  however, 
was  permitted  to  renew  his  covenants 
by  baptism  previous  to  his  demise  on 
Sept.  19,  1889.  (Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1. 
p.   126.) 

CARTER,  William,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
12,  1821,  in  Leadbury,  Herefordshire, 
England,  a  son  of  Thomas  Carter  and 
Sarah  Parker.  He  was  baptized  by 
Edward  Oakey  in  England  Dec.  27, 
1840,  and  came  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1841, 
where  he  became  acquainted  with  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  assisted  in 


696 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


the  erection  of  the  Nauvoo  Temple. 
In  Nauvoo  he  married  Ellen  Benbow 
and  spent  the  winter  of  1846-1847  at 
Winter  Quarters.  After  his  arrival 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  he  did  the 
first  plowing  in  the  "Valley"  near  the 
site  of  the  present  City  and  County 
Building  in  Salt  Lake  City.  After 
serving  as  a  member  of  the  bishopric 
of  the  14th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  for 
a  number  of  years,  he  was  called  by 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  to  assist  in  the 
erection  of  the  Temple  at  St.  George, 
Utah.  There  he  raised  a  large  family 
and  died  June  22,  1895. 

CASE,  James,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  May  4, 
1794,  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  a  son  of 
Joseph  and  Lydia  Case.  After  spend- 
ing a  short  time  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley,  he  went  to  Sanpete  Valley, 
Utah,  in  1851,  and  in  1852  was  ap- 
pointed one  of  the  representatives  to 
the  Utah  Territorial  Legislature  from 
Sanpete  County.  He  died  in  Sanpete 
County  in  1858,  soon  after  returning 
from  a  successful  mission  to  the 
Cherokee  Indians,  in  Oklahoma. 

CHAMBERLAIN,  Solomon,  one  of 
the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  in  1788  at  Old  Canaan,  Conn.,  a 
son  of  Joel  and  Sarah  Chamberlain. 
He  joined  the  Church  at  an  early  day 
and  was  active  in  protecting  the 
saints  whenever  possible.  He  had  a 
full  suit  of  buckskin  with  a  wolfskin 
cap,  tanned  with  the  ears  on  to  resem- 
ble that  animal  which  he  used  as  a  dis- 
guise when  engaged  in  secret  mis- 
sions, and  which  gained  for  him  the 
name  of  "old  buckskin."  After  his 
arrival  in  Salt  Lake  Valley  he  became 
a  pioneer  of  southern  Utah  and  died 
at  Washington,  Washington  Co.,  Utah, 
in  1862.  (Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  604.) 

CHESLEY,  Alexander  Philip,  one 
of  the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Oct.  22,  1814,  in  Fanquier  Co., 


Vermont,  a  son  of  John  and  Elizabeth 
Chesley.  He  was  an  active  member 
of  the  Church  during  the  life  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  After  coming 
to  Utah  he  resided  for  a  time  in  Provo, 
where  he  acted  as  constable.  He  filled 
a  mission  to  Australia  in  1856-1857. 
Later  he  lived  at  Fillmore  and  repre- 
sented Millard  County  in  the  Utah 
Territorial  Legislature.  He  was  a 
farmer  and  stock  raiser  by  vocation 
and  had  several  children.  When  last 
heard  of  he  was  in  San  Juan  Valley, 
California. 

CLAYTON,    William,    one    of    the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah  and  record- 
er of  many  important  events  which 
occurred  on  the  memorable  pioneer 
journey,  was  born  July  17,  1814,  at 
Penwortham,  Lancashire,  England,  a 
son  of  Thomas  Clayton  and  Ann 
Critchlow.  He  was  one  of  the  first  to 
embrace  the  gospel  in  England.  He 
emigrated  to  Nauvoo  in  1840  and  in 
1842  succeeded  Willard  Richards  as 
clerk  to  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith. 
During  the  pioneer  journey  he  kept  an 
accurate  journal  which  is  a  valuable 
record  of  that  important  trek.  He  is 
the  author  of  the  famous  "Mormon" 
hymn,  "Come,  Come,  Ye  Saints."  Elder 
Clayton  returned  to  Winter  Quarters 
in  1847  with  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
and  came  west  again  with  him  in  1848, 
after  which  he  resided  permanently  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  served  as 
treasurer  of  Z.  C.  M.  I.,  Territorial 
Recorder  of  Marks  and  Brands,  and 
Territorial  Auditor  of  Public  Ac- 
counts. The  latter  office  he  held  at 
the  time  of  his  death  which  occurred 
Dec.  4,  1879.  He  was  sui-vived  by  a 
large  family.  (Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 
717.) 

CLOWARD,  Thomas  P.,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  16,  1823  in  Chester  County,  Penn., 
a  son  of  Jacob  Cloward  and  Ann  Pluck. 
After  taking  part  in  the  establishment 
of  the  little  colony  in  Salt  Lake  Val- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


697 


ley,  he  returned  to  Winter  Quarters 
with  Pres.  Brigham  Young  in  the  fall 
of  1847.  There  he  remained  with  his 
family,  his  wife  (Mary  Page),  and 
did  not  come  back  to  the  "Valley"  un- 
til 1852.  From  the  time  of  his  ar- 
rival, he  was  active  in  the  develop- 
ment of  the  future  State  of  Utah  and, 
being  a  shoemaker  by  trade,  is  said 
to  have  made  the  first  pair  of  fine 
shoes  in  the  territory.  He  located  in 
Provo,  Utah  Co.,  and  in  1862  moved 
to  Payson,  where  he  spent  the  re- 
mainder of  his  life.  He  also  married 
Mary  Gardner  and  at  the  time  of  his 
death  Jan.  16,  1909,  was  survived  by 
a  large  family. 

COLTRIN,  Zebedee,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 
7,  1804,  at  Ovid,  Seneca  Co.,  N.  Y.,  a 
son  of  John  and  Sarah  Coltrin.  He 
was  one  of  the  early  members  of  the 
Church,  was  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp 
and  at  the  organization  of  the  first 
Quorum  of  Seventy  Feb.  28,  1835,  he 
was  ordained  a  Seventy  under  the 
hands  of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith, 
and  when  the  quorum  was  more  fully 
organized  he  was  chosen  as  one  of  its 
seven  presidents.  After  assisting  in 
the  establishment  of  the  pioneer  col- 
ony in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  Elder 
Coltrin  returned  to  Winter  Quarters, 
but  came  back  later  with  his  family 
and  for  many  years  was  a  resident  of 
Spanish  Fork,  Utah  Co.,  where  he 
died  July  21,  1887,  as  a  Patriarch  in 
the  Church.  (Bio,  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 
190.) 

CRAIG,  James,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah  and  known  as  the 
"Bugler  of  the  Pioneers,"  was  born  in 
Ireland,  in  1821,  a  son  of  David  and 
Elizabeth  Craig.  After  his  arrival  in 
Salt  Lake  Valley  he  located  for  a  time 
in  Mill  Creek  and  was  a  member  of 
a  company  called  to  assist  in  exter- 
minating reptiles,  birds  and  danger- 
ous animals.  In  1854  he  was  called 
on   a   mission   to    Great   Britain  and 


served  for  a  time  as  president  of  the 
Preston  Conference;  later  he  labored 
in  Ireland,  his  native  land.  He  re- 
turned from  this  mission  in  1858  and 
in  1861  was  called  to  assist  in  estab- 
lishing settlements  in  southern  Utah. 
In  time  he  located  at  Santa  Clara, 
where  he  raised  cotton  with  consid- 
erable success,  and  where  he  died 
March  2,  1868. 

CROSBY,  Oscar,  a  negro,  one  of  the 
original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
about  1815,  in  Virginia.  He  was  a  ser- 
vant of  William  Crosby,  a  wealthy 
member  of  the  Church  in  the  state  of 
Mississippi.  In  order  to  assist  the  pio- 
neer company  on  their  journey  Bro. 
Crosby  and  three  other  brethren  (John 
Brown,  John  H.  Bankhead  and  William 
Lay)  each  concluded  to  send  a  negro 
servant,  with  supplies  and  what  else 
they  could  furnish.  The  four  negroes 
with  two  wagons  left  their  homes  in 
Mississippi  Oct.  29,  1846,  in  charge  of 
Elder  John  Brown,  accompanied  by  a 
family  or  two  of  saints.  En  route 
two  of  the  negroes  died,  but  Oscar 
and  Hark  Lay  (Bro.  Lay's  man),  ar- 
rived safely  and  accompanied  the  pio- 
neers on  their  journey  rendering  good 
service  on  the  way.  Oscar  Crosby 
died  in  Los  Angeles,  California,  in 
1870. 

CURTIS,  Lyman,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Jan. 
21,  1812,  in  New  Salem,  Mass.,  a  son 
of  Nahum  Curtis  and  Millicent  Waite. 
He  was  one  of  the  early  members  of 
the  Church,  being  baptized  about  1833, 
and  in  1834  became  a  member  of 
Zion's  Camp.  He  endured  persecu- 
tion with  the  Saints  in  Missouri  and 
Illinois  and  after  the  expulsion  of  the 
Saints  from  Nauvoo,  migrated  west- 
ward with  the  exiles  to  the  Missouri. 
After  arriving  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Val- 
ley with  the  pioneer  company  in  July, 
1847,  he  returned  to  Winter  Quarters 
with  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  Bi-o.  Cur- 
tis came  to  Utah  with  his  family  in 


698 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


1850  and  in  1853  went  to  southern 
Utah  and  worked  on  a  project  to  raise 
cotton  and  is  said  to  have  picked  the 
first  cotton  raised  in  Utah.  Return- 
ing north  again,  he  settled  in  Utah 
County  as  one  of  the  pioneers  of  Sa- 
lem, that  name  being  chosen  by  him 
in  honor  of  his  birthplace.  There  he 
died  Aug.  8,  1898,  leaving  a  large 
family. 

GUSHING,  Hosea,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  April 
2,  1826,  in  Boston,  Mass.,  a  son  of 
Philip  and  Mary  Gushing.  He  arrived 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  safely  with 
the  pioneer  company,  but  died  of  con- 
sumption in  Salt  Lake  Gity  May  17, 
1854. 

DAVENPORT,  James,  one  of  the 
original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
May  1,  1802,  at  Danville,  Caledonia 
Co.,  Vermont,  a  son  of  Squire  Daven- 
port and  Susannah  Kitridge.  He  died, 
as  a  faithful  member  of  the  Church, 
at  Richmond,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  about 
1885. 

DECKER,  Isaac  Perry,  a  little  boy 
who  at  seven  years  of  age  accompa- 
nied his  mother  (then  the  wife  of  Lor- 
enzo D.  Young)  on  the  famous  journey 
across  the  plains  and  mountains  with 
the  original  pioneers  of  Utah.  Isaac 
Perry  Decker  was  born  Aug.  7,  1820, 
in  Winchester,  Scott  Co.,  111.,  a  son 
of  Isaac  Decker  and  Harriet  Page 
Wheeler.  The  boy  was  an  eye  wit- 
ness to  the  early  struggles  of  the  pio- 
neers to  raise  crops,  remembered  the 
invasion  of  the  crickets  and  the  px'ovi- 
dential  arrival  of  the  sea  gulls.  In 
middle  life  he  made  his  home  in  Provo, 
where  his  son  C.  F.  Decker  sei'ved  as 
mayor  for  some  time,  and  others  of 
his  children  played  important  parts  in 
the  development  of  the  state.  Elder 
Decker  died  of  infirmities  incident  to 
his  age,  Jan.  24,  1916. 

DEWEY,    Benjamin    Franklin,    one 

of  the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 


born  May  5,  1829,  in  Westfield,  Hamp- 
den Co.,  Mass.,  a  son  of  Ashbell  Dewey 
and  Harriet  Adams.  He  was  baptized 
by  Wilford  Woodruff  in  Winter  Quar- 
ters in  1847,  just  before  leaving  as 
a  member  of  the  pioneer  company.  His 
parents  had  become  members  of  the 
Church  in  1846.  After  assisting  to 
locate  the  little  colony  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  Bro.  Dewey  returned 
eastward  with  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
and  his  company  as  far  as  Pacific 
Springs,  whei-e  Bro.  Dewey  met  his 
family  en  route  for  Salt  Lake  Valley 
with  Abraham  O.  Smoot's  company. 
He  therefore  decided  to  go  back  to 
the  "Valley"  with  them.  In  1849  he 
went  to  California  with  Gapt.  Jeffer- 
son Hunt  and  returned  to  Utah  in 
1850.  He  filled  a  mission  to  the  East 
Indies  in  1852-1854.  For  a  number 
of  years  he  followed  the  vocation 
of  a  miner  and  died  in  Chloride,  Ariz- 
ona, Feb.  23,  1904. 

DIXON,  John,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  July  26, 
1818,  in  Cumberland,  England.  He  mi- 
grated to  America  and  was  with  the 
exiled  Saints  at  Winter  Quarters  when 
the  members  of  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  pioneer  band  were  selected. 
With  this  historic  company  he  reached 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  July,  1847, 
and  took  part  in  the  early  settlement 
of  the  saints  in  their  new  home.  In 
1850  Elder  Dixon  accompanied  George 
Q.  Cannon  and  other  missionaries  to 
the  Hawaiian  Islands  but  did  not  re- 
main there  long.  He  returned  home 
with  some  others  of  this  first  group 
of  missionaries  to  Hawaii.  On  Aug. 
17,  1853,  as  John  Dixon  and  three 
other  men  were  hauling  wood  to  Sny- 
der's mill  near  Parley's  Park,  a  band 
of  Indians  fired  upon  them,  killing 
John  Dixon  and  John  Quayle  and 
wounding  another  of  the  men. 

DRIGGS,    Sterling    Graves,    one   of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born   Feb.  12,  1822,  in  Pennsylvania, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


699 


a  son  of  Uriel  Driggs  and  Hannah 
Ford.  He  joined  the  Church  in  Ohio 
and  emigrated  to  Nauvoo,  111.,  in  1840. 
After  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  he  assisted  to  establish  the 
saints  in  their  new  home.  In  1851  he 
accompanied  Apostle  Amasa  M.  Ly- 
man on  an  expedition  to  California 
and  assisted  in  the  founding  of  the 
settlement  of  San  Bernardino.  He  mar- 
ried Sarah  Rodgers  in  Salt  Lake  City 
May  29,  1855,  and  returned  to  Cali- 
fornia, remaining  at  San  Bernardino 
until  that  settlement  was  vacated  in 
1857  when  he  settled  at  Parowan, 
Utah,  where  he  died  Dec.  3,  1860,  from 
injuries  received  while  operating  a 
threshing  machine. 

DYKES,  William,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Nov. 
18,  1815,  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  a  son 
of  Daniel  and  Cynthia  Dykes.  He 
became  a  member  of  the  31st  Quorum 
of  Seventy  in  Nauvoo  and  is  men- 
tioned as  a  member  of  that  quorum  in 
Salt  Lake  City  as  late  as  August, 
1856.  After  arriving  in  Salt  Lake 
City  with  the  pioneer  company,  he 
assisted  to  locate  the  saints  in  their 
new  home  and  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters  with  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
in  the  fall  of  1847.  In  1848  William 
Dykes  is  mentioned  as  having  signed 
a  petition  for  a  postoffice  on  the  Pot- 
tawattamie lands  in  Iowa.  He  died 
in  Nebraska  Nov.  24,  1879. 

EARL,    Sylvester    H.,    one    of    the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  16,  1815,  in  Ohio,  the  son  of  Jos- 
eph Earl  and  Dorcas  Wixom.  He  was 
baptized  Feb.  29,  1837,  by  Charles  C. 
Rich,  located  in  Nauvoo  and  endured 
exile  with  the  saints  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters. After  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  he  assisted  in  building 
up  a  city  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley 
and  later  located  in  the  19th  Ward 
where  he  became  a  member  of  the 
bishopric.  About  this  time  he  mar- 
ried Margaret  Emily  Jones.    He  filled 


a  three  years'  mission  to  Great  Britain 
and  in  1861  he  was  called  to  assist  in 
strengthening  the  settlements  in 
southern  Utah.  He  settled  in  Pine 
Valley  where  he  engaged  in  the  saw 
mill  business  and  in  stock  raising.  Bro. 
Earl  died  at  Middleton,  near  St. 
George,  July  23,  1872,  survived  by  a 
family  of  seven  children.  (Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  3,  p.  667.) 

EASTMAN,    Ozro    French,    one    of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  18,  1828,  in  Windham  Coun- 
ty, Vermont,  a  son  of  James  Eastman 
and  Clarissa  Goss.  His  parents  joined 
the  Church  in  1843,  but  he  never  was 
baptized,  although  he  bore  a  strong 
testimony  to  the  noble  characters  of 
Brigham  Young,  Heber  C.  Kimball  and 
other  leaders  of  the  Church.  As  ex- 
iles from  Nauvoo  the  family  found 
refuge  at  Winter  Quarters,  where 
Bro.  James  Eastman  fitted  out  a 
wagon  and  was  very  anxious  that  his 
son  Ozro  should  become  a  member  of 
Pres.  Brigham  Young's  pioneer  com- 
pany, which  he  was  permitted  to  do. 
With  Pres.  Brigham  Young  he  re- 
turned to  Winter  Quarters  after  a  lo- 
cation for  the  saints  had  been  estab- 
lished in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  but 
in  the  meantime  the  father  (Bro. 
James  Eastman)  had  died.  In  1848, 
with  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  Ozro  and 
his  widowed  mother  and  only  sister, 
Sylvia  S.,  came  to  Salt  Lake  Valley 
where  Ozro  erected  a  house  into  which 
the  family  moved  on  Christmas  Day, 
1848,  and  where  he  established  the 
first  harness  shop  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
Sylvia  became  the  wife  of  Lorenzo  H. 
Hatch,  and  in  1855  Ozro  married  Mary 
Whittle  and  became  the  father  of  ten 
children.  The  family  located  in  Idaho, 
where  he  engaged  in  the  business  of 
a  Sadler  and  died  at  Idaho  Falls, 
March  26,  1916. 

EGAN,  Howard,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  June  15, 


700 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


1815,   at  Tullamore,   King's   Co.,   Ire- 
land, a  son  of  Howard  Egan  and  Ann 
Meade.  When  he  was  about  eight  years 
old  the  family  left  Ireland  for  Amer- 
ica,   locating    in    Montreal,     Canada. 
Howard  became  a  sailor  in  his  youth 
and  when  23  years  of  age  he  married 
Tamson  Parshley.    In  1842  he  and  his 
wife  were  converted  to  the  gospel  by 
Elder  Erastus  Snow  and  went  to  Nau- 
voo,  where  Howard  became  a  member 
of  the  Nauvoo  police  and  a  major  in 
the  Nauvoo  Legion,  which  led  to  his 
being  known  as  "Major  Egan."     The 
little  family  became  exiles  from  Nau- 
voo in  1846  and  located  with  the  saints 
at   Winter    Quarters,   where    Howard 
Egan     was     selected     to     accompany 
Lieut.  Pace  and  John  D.  Lee  to  Fort 
Leavenworth   to   collect  contributions 
from  the  Mormon  Battalion  to  assist 
the    destitute    exiles    camped    on    the 
Missouri  River.    In  the  spring  of  1847 
he   was   selected   to   be   one   of   Pres. 
Brigham    Young's    company    of    pio- 
neers. A  diary  kept  by  Howard  Egan 
during  this  famous  journey  is  of  great 
value    and    has    been    published    by 
his    son    in    a    volume    entitled    "Pio- 
neering the  West."     After  the  saints 
had   been   established   in   their   Rocky 
Mountain  home,  Bro.  Egan  accompa- 
nied   Pres.    Brigham    Young   back   to 
Winter  Quarters  and  retui-ned  to  the 
"Valley"   in   1848   with   his   wife  and 
little  family.  As  the  community  grew, 
Bro.    Egan    held    many    civic    offices, 
was   an   agent  for  the   pony   express 
and  overland  mail  and  successful  as 
a  missionary  and  intermediary  among 
the   Indians,     He   died   in    Salt   Lake 
City   March   16,   1878,  survived   by   a 
family  trained  as  pioneers  and  colon- 
izers. 

EGBERT,    Joseph    S.,    one   of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
March  10,  1818,  in  Sullivan  County, 
Indiana,  a  son  of  John  Egbert  and 
Susan  Hahn.  As  a  member  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  famous  company  of 


pioneers  in  1847,  he  was  also  one  of 
Orson  Pratt's  advance  company,  and 
entered  Salt  Lake  Valley  on  July  22. 
He  returned  to  Winter  Quarters  with 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  later  the  same 
year  and  came  back  with  his  family 
in  1849.  He  made  his  home  in  Kays- 
ville,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  where  he  es- 
tablished a  hotel  and  acted  in  several 
civic  offices.  On  several  occasions 
he  returned  to  the  Missouri  River 
with  Church  teams  to  assist  emigrants 
across  the  plains.  He  died  May  24, 
1898,  at  Ogden,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  3,  p.  70.) 

ELDREDGE,  John  Sunderlin,  one 
of  the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  April  30,  1831,  at  Brutus,  Cay- 
uga Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Alanson  Eld- 
redge  and  Esther  Sunderlin.  After 
his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley 
as  one  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  fa- 
mous company  of  pioneers,  he  took 
an  active  part  in  raising  crops  and 
forwarding  pioneer  industries;  it  is 
claimed  that  he  was  among  the  first 
to  use  the  plow  in  preparing  the  arid 
land  on  the  site  of  the  present  Salt 
Lake  City.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Australia  in  1852-1856.  He  died  sud- 
denly, while  plowing  on  his  farm  at 
Charleston,  Wasatch  Co.,  Utah,  May 
7,  1873,  being  survived  by  a  large 
family. 

ELLSWORTH,  Edmund,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
July  1,  1819,  in  Paris,  Oneida  Co., 
N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Jonathan  Ellsworth  and 
Sarah  Gully.  He  was  baptized  Feb. 
20,  1840,  by  Luman  Heath  and  or- 
dained a  Seventy  March  8,  1843,  by 
Joseph  Young  and  became  a  member 
of  the  Third  Quorum  of  Seventy.  Aft- 
er the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet  Jos- 
eph Smith  and  the  exodus  of  the  saints 
from  Nauvoo,  he  lived  in  the  saints' 
encampment  at  Winter  Quarters,  un- 
til called  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  to 
be  one  of  the  company  of  pioneers. 
He  was  a  son-in-law  of  Pres.  Young, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


701 


having  married  his  daughter  Eliza- 
beth. When  the  pioneer  company  ar- 
rived at  the  Platte  River,  he  assisted 
to  build  a  ferry  there  and  vv^as  ap- 
pointed one  of  ten  men  to  remain  at 
that  point  to  ferry  California  and  Ore- 
gon emigrants  across  the  river,  and 
also  to  render  service  to  the  L.  D.  S. 
emigrants  already  en  route  to  the 
Rocky  Mountains.  Hence,  it  was  not 
until  Oct.  12,  1847,  that  he  arrived 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  filled  a  mission 
to  England  in  1854-1856,  and  on  re- 
turning home  he  was  instructed  by 
Pres.  Young  to  take  charge  of  the 
first  handcart  company  to  cross  the 
plains.  The  journey  was  made  quite 
successfully.  Soon  after  his  arrival 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Bro.  Ellsworth  was 
elected  an  alderman  in  the  Salt  Lake 
City  administration.  In  1880  he  moved 
two  of  his  families  to  Arizona,  in  or- 
der to  avoid  indictment  for  polygamy. 
But  in  this  he  was  not  successful,  for 
he  was  arrested  in  Prescott  and  served 
a  short  term  of  imprisonment  and 
paid  a  fine  of  $300.  Bro.  Ellsworth 
died  at  Show  Low,  Apache  Co.,  Ariz- 
ona, Dec.  29,  1893,  survived  by  a  large 
family. 

EMPEY,  William,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  July 
4,  1808,  in  Osnabrook  Township,  Stor- 
mont  County,  Canada.  He  located  in 
Nauvoo  soon  afterwards  and,  being 
ordained  a  Seventy,  became  a  member 
of  the  13th  Quorum.  With  the  exiled 
saints  he  made  a  temporary  home  at 
Winter  Quarters  and  was  one  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  famous  company  of 
pioneers  in  1847.  With  the  main  body 
of  the  company  he  traveled  until  they 
reached  a  point  on  the  Platte  River 
where  it  was  necessary  to  build  a  fer- 
ry. Here  Bro.  Empey  and  nine  other 
men  were  left  to  establish  a  ferry  for 
the  benefit  of  the  companies  of  saints 
already  on  the  road  en  route  for  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley,  and  to  raise  funds 
by   ferrying    other    emigrants    across 


the  river.  There  he  remained  until 
President  Young  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters  later  the  same  year,  when 
Bro.  Empey  returned  east  with  him. 
With  his  family  Bro.  Empey  came  to 
the  "Valley"  in  1848  and  located  in 
the  15th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  where 
he  became  a  member  of  the  Bishopric. 
From  1852  to  1854  he  filled  a  mission 
to  England,  and  for  a  time  presided 
over  the  Hull  Conference.  When  first 
appointed  to  that  district  he  was,  on 
one  occasion,  quite  discouraged  and 
seeing  an  old  gentleman  with  white 
hair  enter  one  of  the  houses,  felt  im- 
pressed to  follow  him.  To  his  delight 
he  found  a  family  of  saints  who  as- 
sisted him  to  open  up  missionary  work 
in  the  vicinity.  Strange  to  say  none 
of  the  family  knew  anything  of  the 
white  haired  gentleman  seen  by  Bro. 
Empey.  After  his  retui'n  home  Bro. 
Empey  was  called  to  help  strengthen 
the  settlements  in  southern  Utah  and 
died  at  St.  George  Aug.  19,  1890,  sur- 
vived by  a  large  family. 

ENSIGN,  Horace  Datus,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  8,  1826,  at  Westfield,  Hampden 
Co.,  Mass.,  a  son  of  Horace  Datus  En- 
sign and  Mary  Brunson.  His  parents 
became  members  of  the  Church  in 
1843  and  with  a  family  of  five  sons 
and  one  daughter  located  in  Nauvoo  in 

1846  but  soon  afterwards  wei'e  forced 
to  leave  their  home  and  with  the  ex- 
iled saints  made  a  temporary  home 
at  Winter  Quarters.  The  father  died 
in  September,  1846,  and  Horace,  the 
oldest  son,  was  called  in  the  spring  of 

1847  to  join  the  company  of  pioneers. 
Horace  remained  in  Salt  Lake  Valley 
until  Pres.  Young  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters,  when  he  accompanied  him 
as  far  as  the  Big  Sandy  where  he 
met  his  widowed  mother  and  her  fam- 
ily en  route  for  the  "Valley"  in  Capt. 
Daniel  Spencer's  company.  With  them 
he  returned  to  Salt  Lake  Valley  and 
located  in  Ogden  where  he  worked  for 


702 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Captain  James  Brown.  He  took  an 
active  part  in  the  Echo  Canyon  War 
in  1857-1858,  married  Eliza  Jane  Ste- 
wart and  was  the  father  of  three  sons 
and  three  daughters.  He  died  in  Og- 
den  Sept.  1,  1866. 

EVERETT,  Addison,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Oct. 
10, 1805,  at  Wallkill,  Orange  Co.,  N.  Y., 
a  son  of  Ephraim  Everett,  jun.,  and 
Deborah  Carwin.  He  was  baptized 
Sept.  1,  1837,  by  Elijah  Fordham  and 
was  one  of  the  first  members  of  the 
New  York  Branch  of  the  Church.  He 
located  at  Nauvoo  and,  after  the  exo- 
dus of  the  saints  from  their  homes 
there,  he  became  a  Bishop  of  one  of 
the  wards  at  Winter  Quarters  until 
called  to  be  one  of  the  pioneer  com- 
pany in  1847.  After  Salt  Lake  City 
had  been  divided  into  wards  he  be- 
came Bishop  of  the  8th  Ward.  In  1861 
he  was  called  with  others  to  assist  in 
strengthening  the  settlements  of 
southern  Utah.  He  took  part  in  the 
Salmon  River  in  1853  and  in  the  latter 
part  of  his  life,  with  his  wife  Orpha, 
devoted  himself  to  laboring  in  the  St. 
George  Temple  for  his  dead.  He  died 
at  St.  George  Jan.  12,  1885. 

FAIRBANKS,  Nathaniel,  one  of  the 
original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
May  10,  1823,  at  Queensbury,  Wash- 
ington Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Joseph 
Fairbanks  and  Polly  White.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  28,  1843,  by  John  Cairns, 
located  at  Nauvoo  in  1844  and  with 
the  exiled  saints  made  a  temporary 
home  at  Winter  Quarters.  He  was 
one  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  famous 
company  of  pioneers.  He  returned 
East  with  Pres.  Young  but  en  route 
met  his  brother  John  B.  Fairbanks 
and  family  coming  to  Salt  Lake  Val- 
ley in  Daniel  Spencer's  company  and 
accompanied  him  to  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
and  took  part  in  the  early  settlement 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  In  1853,  as  he 
was  driving  a  herd  of  cattle  from  Salt 


Lake  Valley  to  Sacramento,  Califor- 
nia, he  was  accidentally  thrown  from 
a  mule  and  drowned  in  a  river  near 
Sacramento.  (Bio.  Ency.  Vol.  2,  p. 
355.) 

FARR,  Aaron  F.,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Oct.  31, 
1818,  at  Waterford,  Caledonia  Co.,  Ver- 
mont. He  was  baptized  in  1832  and  in 
1836  his  father's  family  moved  to  Kirt- 
land,  Ohio,  and  in  1842  located  at  Nau- 
voo, 111.  On  June  16,  1844,  he  married 
Persis  Atherton,  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  performing  the  ceremony.  In 
1847  he  was  chosen  as  one  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  company  of  pioneers 
and  traveled  with  the  main  body  until 
the  company  reached  Green  River, 
when  he  and  four  other  brethren  were 
sent  back  to  act  as  guides  to  the  on- 
coming emigration.  He  came  to  Salt 
Lake  Valley  Sept.  20,  1847,  with  Dan- 
iel Spencer's  company  and  helped  to 
establish  a  government  in  Salt  Lake 
Valley,  being  by  profession  a  lawyer. 
In  1852-1853  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
West  Indies  and  on  his  way  home  was 
called  to  preside  over  the  St.  Louis 
Branch,  succeeding  Horace  S.  El- 
dredge  in  that  position.  Upon  his 
return  he  made  his  home  in  Ogden 
where  he  practiced  law  and  served  as 
U.  S.  Deputy  Marshal  under  Joseph 
L.  Heywood.  In  1856  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Las  Vegas,  Arizona  (now  Ne- 
vada), and  in  1859  was  elected  probate 
judge  of  Weber  County.  He  also  served 
as  an  alderman  of  Ogden  and  as  rep- 
resentative for  Weber  County  to  the 
Utah  territorial  legislature.  He  died 
Nov.  8,  li)03,  at  Logan,  Utah,  while 
visiting  his  daughter,  wife  of  Moses 
Thatcher.  He  was  survived  by  three 
sons  and  two  daughters.  He  was  a 
brother  to  Lorin  Farr  of  Ogden. 

FITZGERALD,    Perry,    one    of    the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Dec.  22,  1815,  in  Fayette  County,  Penn- 
sylvania, a  son  of  John  Fitzgerald 
and   Leah   Phillips.     He   received  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


703 


gospel  in  Illinois  in  1842,  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1846  and  a  High  Priest  in 
1846.  With  the  exiled  saints  he  left 
his  home  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  and  spent  the 
winter  of  1846-1847  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters. He  was  chosen  as  one  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  company  of  pioneers 
and  assisted  in  building  the  "Old  Fort" 
in  Salt  Lake  City  and  other  forts  in 
the  vicinity.  In  1849  he  located  at 
Mill  Creek  and  from  there  he  moved 
to  Draper,  Salt  Lake  County,  where 
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life,  tak- 
ing part  in  the  Walker  Indian  war  and 
in  other  ways  assisting  to  protect 
the  settlers  against  Indian  invasions. 
He  was  faithful  in  the  discharge  of 
his  duties  as  a  Latter-day  Saint  and 
scrupulously  honest  in  all  his  dealings. 
The  wife  of  his  youth  died  in  1852, 
after  which,  at  different  times,  he 
married  Ann  Wilson  and  Agnes  Wads- 
worth.  He  was  the  father  of  twelve 
sons  and  eight  daughters,  and  died  at 
Draper  Oct.  4,  1889. 

FLAKE,  Green,  one  of  the  three 
negro  servants  who  belonged  to  the 
original  company  of  Utah  pioneers, 
was  born  as  a  slave  in  January,  1828, 
in  Anson  County,  North  Carolina,  on 
the  plantation  of  Bro.  James  Flake's 
father  and  spent  all  his  early  life  in 
that  family.  He  came  with  that  fam- 
ily to  Nauvoo,  and  thence  journeyed 
west  during  the  exodus  from  Nauvoo. 
He  was  baptized  in  1844  by  John 
Brown  and  given  to  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  by  Bro.  James  Flake.  After 
his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
Green  Flake  resided  for  some  years 
in  Union.  Later  he  moved  to  Idaho 
Falls,  where  he  died  Oct.  20,  1903. 

FOWLER,    John    Sherman,    one    of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  in  New  York  City  July  12,  1819. 
Having  become  a  member  of  the 
Church,  he  received  a  patriarchal 
blessing  from  Asahel  Smith  at  Nau- 
voo, 111.,  Feb.  27,  1846,  and  was  a 
member  of  the  2nd   Quorum  of  Sev- 


enty. He  came  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  with  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and 
the  pioneers  in  1847,  but  becoming  dis- 
couraged he  went  to  California  in  1848, 
and  subsequently  died  there. 

FOX,  Samuel  Bradford,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Dec.  4,  1829,  at  Adams,  Jefferson  Co., 
N.  Y.,  and  became  a  member  of  the 
Church  as  a  boy.  He  was  one  of  the 
young  men  selected  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  to  make  the  pioneer  journey 
and  locate  homes  for  the  saints  in 
the  Rocky  Mountains.  En  route  he  act- 
ed as  teamster  for  Pres.  Young.  In 
1850  he  went  to  California,  and  the  fol- 
lowing year  suffered  a  severe  attack 
of  smallpox,  his  face  being  badly 
scarred.  He  is  reported  to  have  said 
that  his  friends  in  Utah  should  never 
see  him  in  that  condition.  In  1870  he 
was  living  in  Oregon.  Both  his  par- 
ents were  faithful  Latter-day  Saints 
and  died  at  Nauvoo. 

FREEMAN,    John    Monroe,    one    of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  resided 
for  a  time  in  Nauvoo,  where  he  be- 
came a  member  of  the  31st  Quorum  of 
Seventy,  organized  in  Nauvoo  in  Oc- 
tober, 1845.  He  did  not  remain  long 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  but  went 
to  Carson  Valley,  Nevada,  in  1850, 
where  he  died  of  cholera. 

FRICK,  Horace  Monroe,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  returned  to 
Winter  Quarters  with  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  in  the  fall  of  1847.  He  did  not 
make  his  home  with  the  saints  in  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  but  went  to  Cali- 
fornia, where  he  resided  at  San  Ber- 
nardino. In  1860  he  visited  friends  at 
Manti,  Utah,  at  which  time  he  was  still 
living  at  San  Bernardino.  Nothing 
further  is  known  of  him. 

FROST,  Burr,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Mar.  4, 
1816,  at  Waterbury  (or  New  Haven), 
Conn.,  a  son  of  Alpheus  and  Elizabeth 


704 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Frost.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  he  was  appointed  one 
of  a  committee  to  assist  in  the  ex- 
termination of  dangerous  animals, 
snakes,  etc.,  and  was,  at  all  times 
ready  to  protect  the  settlers  against 
marauding  Indians.  He  was  a  black- 
smith by  trade  and  made  his  home  in 
Salt  Lake  City.  From  1852  to  1854 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Australia  and 
was  one  of  the  presidents  of  the  70th 
Quorum  of  Seventy.  He  died  Mar.  16, 
1878,  in  Salt  Lake  City  survived  by  a 
large  family. 

GIBBONS,  Andrew  S.,  one  of  the 
original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
March  12,  1825,  in  Union  township, 
Licking  Co.,  Ohio.  When  he  was  an 
infant  his  father  gave  him  to  a  family 
by  the  name  of  Smith,  a  relative  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  By  them  he 
was  trained  in  the  principles  of  the 
gospel  and  married  Rispah  Knight,  a 
daughter  of  Bishop  Vinson  Knight  in 
Nauvoo,  111.  After  seeing  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  new  home  for  the  saints 
in  the  Rocky  Mountains,  he  returned 
to  Winter  Quarters  with  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young,  and  in  1852  came  again  to 
Utah  with  his  family  and  located  in 
Davis  County.  In  1854  he  was  called 
to  strengthen  the  settlements  in  Iron 
County  and  served  as  a  missionary  to 
the  Indians.  In  the  spring  of  1861  he 
located  at  St.  George,  where  he  was 
elected  sheriff  of  Washington  County. 
In  1865  he  was  called  to  locate  on  the 
Muddy  River  (now  in  Nevada)  to 
mediate  between  the  white  men  and 
the  Indians.  In  1880  he  moved  to  St. 
Johns,  Arizona,  where  he  died  Feb. 
9,  1886,  as  a  member  of  the  High 
Council  of  the  Eastern  Arizona  Stake 
of  Zion.     (Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  194.) 


chosen  as  one  of  the  historic  band  of 
pioneers  under  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
he  took  an  active  part  in  assisting  and 
protecting  the  saints  in  their  forced 
exodus  from  Nauvoo  and  in  their  set- 
tlement at  Winter  Quarters.  After 
his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
he  assisted  in  building  the  Old  Fort, 
and  married  Desdemona  Chase,  daugh- 
ter of  Isaac  Chase,  one  of  the  build- 
ers of  the  old  Chase  mill  in  Liberty 
Park,  Salt  Lake  City.  Bro.  Gleason 
resided  in  Davis  County,  where  he  was 
a  president  of  the  40th  Quorum  of 
Seventy  and  later  became  a  High 
Priest  and  served  as  county  commis- 
sioner, justice  of  the  peace  and  coun- 
ty clerk.  In  1873  he  moved  to  Pleas- 
ant Grove,  Utah  County,  where  he 
died  Dec.  21,  1904,  survived  by  a  large 
family.      (Bio.   Ency.,  Vol.   3,  p.  91.) 

GLINES,  Eric,  was  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  but  little  is 
known  of  his  history.  When  the  com- 
pany arrived  at  the  Platte  River,  a 
ferry  was  constructed,  and  when  the 
company  left  the  river,  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young  appointed  nine  men  to  re- 
main at  the  ferry  to  assist  the  on- 
coming emigration  and  also  to  ferry 
other  companies  over  who  might  be 
en  route  for  California,  thus  assisting 
to  make  the  ferry  self-supporting. 
Eric  Glines  was  not  appointed  to  this 
mission,  but  insisted  upon  remaining. 
Some  days  later,  repenting  of  his  dis- 
obedience, he  followed  after  the  pio- 
neers, camping  one  night  alone  and 
other  nights  with  Missourians.  This 
was  a  dangerous  undertaking  and  he 
was  reprimanded  by  Pi'es.  Young  for 
his  conduct.  When  last  heard  from 
he  was  living  at  St.  George,  in  south- 
ern Utah. 


GLEASON,   John   Streater,   one   of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Jan.  ]3,  1819,  in  Livonia,  Liv- 
ingston Co.,  N.  Y.  He  was  baptized 
in    1842,  and    from   that  time    until 


GODDARD,  Stephen  H.,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  1847,  was  born 
Aug.  24,  1810,  in  Clinton  Co.,  N.  Y., 
a  son  of  Stephen  G.  Goddard  and 
Sylvia  Smith.    He  was  ordained  a  Sev- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


705 


enty  by  H.  Harrison  June  9,  1845,  and 
became  the  senior  member  of  the  27th 
Quorum  of  Seventy.  After  his  arrival 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  with  the 
pioneer  band,  he  assisted  in  building 
up  the  city  and  ow^ned  land  at  the  cor- 
ner of  Main  Street  and  First  South 
Street,  later  known  as  the  Godbe-Pitts 
Corner.  He  was  leader  of  the  Taber- 
nacle choir  when  it  sang  in  the  Old 
Tabernacle.  For  a  time  he  resided 
at  Bountiful,  Utah,  but  later  went  to 
California  and  died  at  the  home  of 
his  daughter,  Mrs.  Harrison,  at  San 
Bernardino,   Sept.   10,   1898. 

GRANT,  David,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  July  21, 
1816,  at  Arbroath,  Forfarshire,  Scot- 
land, a  son  of  Robert  and  Belle  Grant. 
He  was  one  of  the  early  converts  to 
the  gospel  in  England  and  emigrating 
to  America,  was  ordained  a  Priest  at 
Freedom,  111.,  Feb.  20,  1840.  He  was 
with  the  exiled  saints  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters and  was  chosen  as  one  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  company  of  pio- 
neers in  1847.  After  the  saints  had 
been  established  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley,  Bro.  Grant  returned  to  Win- 
ter Quarters  with  Pres.  Young's  com- 
pany in  1847  and  came  back  to  Utah 
with  him  in  the  fall  of  1848.  In  1851 
he  was  ordained  a  Seventy  and  be- 
came a  member  of  the  33rd  Quorum. 
From  1852  to  1856  he  filled  a  mission 
to  England,  leaving  his  home  in  Utah 
in  September,  1852,  and  returning  in 
October,  1856.  He  crossed  the  ocean 
in  1856  as  a  counselor  to  Dan  Jones 
on  the  ship  "Samuel  Curling"  and 
crossed  the  plains  as  an  assistant  to 
Captain  Edward  Bunker  in  the  direc- 
tion of  a  handcart  company.  In  1862, 
Bro.  Grant  was  called  to  assist  in  rais- 
ing cotton  in  southern  Utah.  He  re- 
turned to  his  home  in  Mill  Creek,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  Utah,  where  he  died  Dec. 
22,  1868. 

GRANT,  George  R.,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  who,  after  re- 


maining a  short  time  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  returned  with  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  to  Winter  Quarters, 
where  in  January,  1848,  he  was  one 
of  the  signers  to  a  petition  to  the 
U.  S.  government  to  establish  a  post- 
office  on  the  Pottawattamie  lands.  He 
probably  returned  to  the  "Valley"  with 
Pres.  Brigham  Young  in  1848.  He 
located  in  Davis  County,  where  he 
lived  near  John  M.  Kay  (at  Kays- 
ville)  in  1852.  From  1855  to  1858  he 
served  as  one  of  the  Salmon  River 
missionaries.  When  last  heard  from, 
he  was  residing  in  Virginia  City,  Ne- 
vada. 

GREENE,  John  Young,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Sept.  2,  1826,  in  the  State  of  New 
York,  a  son  of  John  P.  Greene  and 
Rhoda  Young.  He  received  the  ful- 
ness of  the  gospel  in  his  youth  and 
drove  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  team  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  arriving  there 
July  24,  1847.  In  1857  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Europe.  After  his 
arrival  in  Liverpool,  England,  Aug.  4, 
1857,  he  was  appointed  to  labor  in  the 
Scandinavian  Mission  and  arrived  in 
Copenhagen,  Denmark,  Aug.  12,  1857. 
He  set  to  work  diligently  to  acquire  a 
knowledge  of  the  Danish  language, 
while  laboring  in  the  province  of 
Jutland  and  gained  many  friends 
among  the  warm-hearted  Danish  peo- 
ple, but  returned  to  Utah  in  1858,  on 
account  of  the  Johnston  army  troubles. 
After  a  long  career  of  usefulness,  he 
died  in  Salt  Lake  City  May  24,  1880. 

GROVER,  Thomas,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  July 
22,  1807,  in  Whitehall,  Washington 
Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Thomas  Grover 
and  Polly  Spaulding.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  4,  p.  137.) 

HANCOCK,    Joseph,   one   of    the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  v/as  born 
March  17,  1800,  at  Smithfield.  Mass- 


Vol.  IV.  No.  46 


November  7,  1936 


706 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


and  was  baptized  by  Daniel  Stanton  at 
Mayfield,  Ohio,  in  1830.  In  1834  he 
was  chosen  a  member  of  Zion's  Camp, 
and  on  the  way  from  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
to  Clay  County,  Mo.,  he  acted  as  a 
hunter  and  was  known  as  "Joseph's 
Nimrod"  on  that  account.  With  oth- 
ers of  that  company  he  was  taken 
sick  with  cholera,  but  was  healed  un- 
der the  hands  of  the  Prophet.  Bro. 
Hancock  hauled  rock  for  the  Kirtland 
Temple  and  endured  persecution  with 
the  saints  in  Missouri.  When  the 
Prophet  crossed  the  Mississippi  river 
from  Nauvoo  in  1844  he  put  up  at 
Joseph  Hancock's  house.  After  the 
martyrdom  of  the  Prophet  and  his 
brother  and  the  exile  of  the  saints 
from  Nauvoo,  Bro.  Hancock  located 
with  them  at  Winter  Quarters  and 
being  chosen  as  one  of  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  company  of  pioneers,  was  ac- 
tively engaged  in  hunting  on  the  way, 
doing  his  best  to  keep  the  company 
supplied  with  game.  He  is  said  to 
have  killed  the  first  deer  above  En- 
sign Peak.  He  accompanied  Pres. 
Young  back  to  Winter  Quarters  in  the 
fall  of  1847,  but  returned  to  the  "Val- 
ley" in  1852.  He  was  a  faithful  mem- 
ber of  the  Church,  but  liked  a  roving 
life  and  spent  much  of  his  time  trav- 
eling back  and  forth  between  Utah 
and  California.  He  died  July  4,  1893, 
at  the  home  of  his  nephew,  George  W. 
Hancock,  in  Payson,  Utah. 

HANKS,  Sidney  Alvarus,  one  of  the 
original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  16,  1820,  at  Madison,  Lake  Co., 
Ohio,  a  son  of  Benjamin  Hanks  and 
Martha  Knowlton.  After  his  arrival 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  with  the 
pioneers  he  did  his  part  to  establish 
homes  for  the  companies  of  saints 
who  should  follow,  and  in  1852  re- 
sponded to  a  call  to  fill  a  mission  to 
the  Society  Islands.  From  this  mis- 
sion he  returned  in  1860  and  on  June  1, 
1862,  married  Mary  Ann  Cook,  who 
became  the  mother  of  one  son  and  two 


daughters.  The  family  located  ax 
Snyderville,  near  Parley's  Park.  In 
March,  1870,  having  lost  a  cow,  he 
set  out  to  look  for  her  and  froze  to 
death.  His  body  was  not  recovered 
until  a  month  later. 

HANSEN,   Hans   Christian,  one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Nov.  23,  1806,  in  Copenhagen, 
Denmark.  He  went  to  sea  as  a  boy 
and  during  some  of  his  voyages  visited 
America.  On  one  of  these  occasions 
he  became  converted  to  the  restored 
gospel  and  was  baptized  in  Boston, 
Mass.,  durir^g  the  summer  of  1842 
by  Elder  Freeman  Nickerson.  When 
the  pioneer  company  was  organized, 
Hans  C.  Hansen  was  the  only  Scandi- 
navian chosen.  He  was  an  expei't  vio- 
linist and  rendered  service  in  the  early 
days  of  the  settlement  of  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  with  his  music.  He  made 
his  home  at  Salina,  Sevier  Co.,  Utah, 
but,  it  is  believed,  never  married.  He 
died  at  Salina  Oct.  10,  1890.  (Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  766.) 

HARMON,   Appleton    Mile,   one   of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  May  29,  1820,  at  Conneaut,  Pa. 
Being  a  mechanic,  he  constructed  the 
famous  I'oadometer  invented  by  Wil- 
liam Clayton  and  used  by  the  pioneer 
company  to  measure  distances  on  the 
road.  He  married  Elmeda  Stringham 
in  Nauvoo,  111.,  was  a  member  of  the 
11th  Quorum  of  Seventy  and,  after 
establishing  his  family  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  1848,  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  England  in  1850-1853.  He 
assisted  to  erect  sawmills  in  Salt 
Lake,  Millard  and  Washington  coun- 
ties, Utah,  and  as  a  contractor  he  built 
a  furniture  factory  at  Toquerville  and 
a  woolen  mill  at  Washington,  and  also 
assisted  in  setting  up  the  machinery 
in  all  of  these  undertakings.  He  made 
his  home  at  Holden,  Millard  Co.,  Utah, 
where  he  died  Feb.  27,  1877,  survived 
by  several  married  sons  and  daugh- 
ters. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


707 


HARPER,   Charles   Alfred,   one   of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Jan.  27,  1816,  at  Upper  Provi- 
dence, Montgomery  Co.,  Pa.  He  was 
a  college  graduate  and  dealer  in  fine 
carriages,  became  a  member  of  the 
Church  in  the  early  days  of  Nauvoo 
and  was  well  acquainted  with  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  the  early 
leaders  of  the  Church.  After  his  ar- 
rival in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
July,  1847,  with  the  pioneer  company, 
he  retui'ned  to  Winter  Quarters,  but 
came  back  with  his  family  in  1848. 
He  helped  to  establish  colonies  in 
southern  Utah  and  Arizona  and  finally 
located  in  Cottonwood,  Salt  Lake 
County,  Utah,  where  he  died  April  24, 
1900,  survived  by  a  large  family. 

HENRIE,  William,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 
11,  1799,  in  Pennsylvania,  a  son  of 
Daniel  Henrie  and  Sarah  Mendel.  He 
was  baptized  by  Andrew  Lamoreaux 
July  17,  1842,  in  Hamilton  Co.,  Ohio, 
and  became  one  of  the  famous  band 
of  Utah  pioneers  in  1847.  After  his 
arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  he 
assisted  in  locating  the  saints  in  the 
old  fort  and  adjacent  country.  In 
April,  1849,  he  was  one  of  the  speak- 
ers at  the  stand  at  the  old  bowery  in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  later  the  same 
year  was  appointed  a  member  of  an 
exploring  committee  to  locate  suitable 
places  for  settlement  in  the  region 
of  Utah  Lake.  He  established  resi- 
dence at  Bountiful,  Davis  County, 
where  he  died  Dec.  18,  1883,  survived 
by  a  large  family. 

HIGBEE,  John  S.,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  March 
7,  1804,  in  Tate  township,  Clermont 
Co.,  Ohio,  a  son  of  Isaac  and  Sophie 
Higbee.  He  was  a  cabinet  maker  by 
vocation  and  after  his  marriage  to 
Sarah  Voorhees  of  Palestine,  Ohio,  he 
made  his  home  in  Lewistown,  Ohio, 
where  he  was  baptized  in  May,  1831, 


by  Calvin  Wilson  and  confirmed  by 
Lyman  Wight.  He  moved  to  Jack- 
son County,  Mo.,  where  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  Aaronic  Priesthood  by 
Lyman  Wight.  He  was  appointed  as- 
sessor of  Caldwell  County,  Mo.,  while 
many  of  the  saints  were  located  in 
that  county.  On  April  4,  1841,  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  by  Isaac  Hig- 
bee and  was  ordained  a  Bishop  in 
Nauvoo,  111.,  March  24,  1845,  under 
the  hands  of  Amasa  M.  Lyman,  Orson 
Pratt  and  John  E.  Page,  and  set  apart 
to  preside  over  the  First  Ward  of  that 
city.  After  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet  and  the  exodus  of  the  saints 
from  Nauvoo,  he  became  one  of  the 
pioneer  company  and  traveled  with 
them  as  far  as  the  upper  Platte  river, 
when  he  and  nine  other  brethren  were 
appointed  to  operate  a  ferry  until  the 
next  large  company  of  saints  should 
arrive  to  relieve  them.  There  he  re- 
mained until  Aug.  10,  1847,  when  he 
started  east  to  meet  his  family,  who 
was  traveling  with  one  of  the  west- 
bound pioneer  companies,  which  ar- 
rived in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  Sept. 
26,  1847.  From  1849  to  1852  he  filled 
a  mission  to  England.  In  1865  he 
moved  to  southern  Utah,  and  died  at 
Toquerville,  Washington  Co.,  Nov.  1, 
1877,  survived  by  a  large  family. 

HOLMAN,  John  Greenleaf,  one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Oct.  18,  1828,  at  Byron  Center, 
Genessee  Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Joshua 
Sawyer  Holman  and  Rebecca  Green- 
leaf.  He  was  baptized  when  eight 
years  old  and  moved  with  his  parents 
to  Kirtland,  Ohio.  There  he  became 
closely  associated  with  the  Church 
and  was  chosen  as  one  of  Pres.  Brig- 
ham  Young's  band  of  pioneers  in  1847. 
He  returned  east  with  Pres.  Young 
in  the  fall  of  1847  and  did  not  come 
back  to  the  "Valley''  until  1850,  when 
he  brought  his  wife,  Nancy  Clark, 
whom  he  had  married  in  1849.  Bro. 
Holman  resided  successively  at  Pleas- 


708 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


and  Grove  and  at  Santaquin,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  and  in  1883  moved  to  Rexburg, 
Idaho,  where  he  died  Nov.  5,  1888. 
While  in  Pleasant  Grove  he  served 
as  an  alderman  and  city  councilman. 
He  was  survived  by  a  large  and  high- 
ly respected  family.  (Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
3,  p.  116.) 

HOWD,  Simeon,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  in  1813, 
at  Camden,  New  York.  After  his  ar- 
rival in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  as 
one  of  the  pioneers  in  July,  1847,  he 
was  active  in  assisting  to  make  homes 
for  the  saints  and  to  supply  their 
needs,  and  when  Pres.  Brigham  Young- 
returned  to  the  "Valley"  in  1848,  after 
having  gone  back  to  Winter  Quarters 
in  the  fall  of  1847,  Simeon  Howd  was 
one  of  the  brethren  who  went  to  meet 
the  company,  taking  supplies  for  their 
subsistence.  At  a  conference  held  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  City  April  6,  1850, 
he  was  appointed  first  counselor  to 
Joseph  Harker  in  the  presidency  of 
the  Priests'  Quorum,  which  position 
he  held  until  he  was  called  in  1851 
to  assist  in  establishing  settlements 
in  "Little  Salt  Lake  Valley,"  Iron 
County,  Utah.  In  1856,  when  Beaver 
was  settled  by  saints  from  Parowan, 
Simeon  Howd  was  one  of  those  called 
to  go  there  and  was  appointed  the  first 
presiding  Elder  of  the  settlement.  He 
died  in  Beaver  in   1862. 

IVORY,  Matthew,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  July 
13,  1800,  at  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  a  son 
of  Matthew  and  Ann  Ivory.  He  was 
baptized  Feb.  1,1840,  by  Joseph  New- 
ton and  in  1847  became  one  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  company  of  pio- 
neers. On  April  9,  1879,  as  a  resident 
of  Beaver,  Beaver  Co.,  Utah,  he  was 
set  apart  for  a  mission  to  New  Jersey. 
From  this  mission  he  returned  Sept. 
12,  1879.  He  was  an  expert  mechanic, 
and  in  1885,  although  85  years  of  age, 
he  fitted  up  the  mill  stones  in  a  newly 
erected  grain  chopper  at  Beaver.   Be- 


fore leaving  his  job,  he  made  a  final 
test  and  for  a  time  all  went  well,  when 
suddenly,  one  of  the  stones  got  loose, 
and  while  still  revolving  at  a  tremen- 
dous rate,  it  struck  Bi'o.  Ivory  in  the 
stomach,  killing  him  almost  instantly. 
This  accident  occurred  Oct.  17,  1885. 

JACKMAN,  Levi,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  July 
28,  1797,  in  Orange  County,  Vermont, 
a  son  of  Moses  French  Jackman  and 
Elizabeth  Carr.  After  coming  to  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  as  one  of  the  pioneers 
in  1847  he  assisted  in  building  up  the 
city  and  was  a  counselor  to  Bishop 
Shadrach  Roundy  of  the  16th  Ward 
for  a  number  of  years.  Subsequently 
he  was  ordained  a  Patriarch.  He  died 
at  Salem,  Utah  Co.,  Utah,  July  23, 
1876,  survived  by  a  large  family.  (Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  769.) 

JACOB,  Norton,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Aug.  11, 
1804,  in  Sheffield,  Berkshire  Co.,  Mass., 
a  son  of  Udney  H.  and  Elizabeth  Jacob. 
He  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley 
in  July,  1847,  and  later  in  the  year 
returned  to  Winter  Quarters  with 
Pres.  Brigham  Young.  He  had  a  wife 
(Emily  Heaton)  and  family  in  the 
East,  and  with  them  he  returned  West 
with  Pres.  Brigham  Young  in  1848, 
acting  on  the  journey  as  captain  of 
the  guard.  After  having  made  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  Valley,  he  assisted 
in  building  up  Salt  Lake  City  and 
was  appointed  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  foreman  of  the  carpenters  and 
joiners  working  on  public  works.  In 
1855  he  was  architect  of  a  bridge 
erected  over  the  Weber  River.  As  a 
Seventy  he  was  a  member  of  the  14th 
Quorum.  On  July  24,  1860,  he  deliv- 
ered the  oration  at  Heber  City,  where 
he  had  made  his  home,  and  where  he 
was  appointed  justice  of  the  peace  in 
1862.  Bro.  Jacob's  first  wife  became 
the  mother  of  eleven  children  and  his 
second  wife,  whom  he  also  married 
in  the  East,  bore  him  two   children. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


709 


He  also  married  a  widow  named  Mott, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  who  bore  him  four 
sons.  Bro.  Jacob  died  at  Glendale. 
Utah,  Jan.  30,  1879. 

JOHNSON,    Artemas,     one   of   the 

original  pioneei's  of  Utah,  was  born 
April  18,  1809,  at  Remson,  Oneida  Co., 
N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Artemas  and  Abia  John- 
son. He  was  sustained  to  be  ordained 
an  Elder,  at  a  confei'ence  held  in  Com- 
merce (Nauvoo)  Oct.  5,  1839,  and  after 
being  exiled  from  Nauvoo  was  chosen 
in  the  spring  of  1847  as  one  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  company  of  pio- 
neers. Later  in  the  year  he  returned 
to  Winter  Quarters  with  Pi'es.  Young, 
and  on  Dec.  2,  1847,  received  a  patri- 
archal blessing  at  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa, 
under  the  hands  of  Patriarch  Isaac 
Morley.  He  is  believed  to  have  come 
back  to  Utah  later  and  died  there  many 
years  ago. 

JOHNSON,  Luke  S.,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Nov. 
2,  1807,  in  Pomfret,  Windsor  Co.,  Ver- 
mont. He  was  baptized  by  the  Proph- 
et Joseph  Smith  May  10,  1831.  He  was 
a  member  of  Zion's  Camp,  and  on  Feb. 
15,  1835,  was  ordained  one  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles.  After  a  while  he  in- 
dulged in  speculation  and  devoted  more 
of  his  attention  to  his  financial  inter- 
ests than  to  his  duty  in  the  Church  and 
was  excommunicated  from  the  Church 
for  apostasy  at  Far  West,  Mo.,  April 
13,  1838.  He  continued  friendly  rela- 
tions with  the  saints,  however,  and  was 
baptized  in  Nauvoo  and  came  to  the 
"Valley"  as  one  of  the  pioneers  in  July, 
1847.  In  1858  he  settled  at  St.  John, 
Tooele  County,  Utah,  and  was  appoint- 
ed Bishop  when  that  ward  was  organ- 
ized. On  Dec.  9,  1861,  he  died  at  the 
home  of  his  brother-in-law,  Orson 
Hyde,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 

JOHNSON,  Philo,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
6,  1815,  at  Newton,  Fairfield  Co.,  Conn., 


a  son  of  Samuel  and  Abigail  Johnson. 
After  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley,  he  was  appointed  by  Pres. 
Young  to  manufacture  hats,  and  in 
1861,  at  a  fair  at  Payson,  Utah,  where 
he  had  located,  Bro.  Johnson  had  an 
exhibit  of  hats,  which  was  highly 
praised.  In  1864  he  still  resided  at 
Payson  and  on  Feb.  25th  had  the  mis- 
fortune to  lose  a  little  son,  who  was 
killed  while  handling  a  gun  sent  to 
Bro.  Johnson  to  be  repaired.  The  date 
of  Bro.  Johnson's  death  is  not  known. 

KELSEY,  Stephen,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneei's  of  Utah,  was  born  Dec. 
23,  1830,  in  Montville,  Geauga  Co., 
Ohio,  a  son  of  Stephen  Kelsey  and 
Rachel  Allen.  His  mother  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Church,  but  he  had  not  been 
baptized  when  he  became  one  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young's  company  of  pio- 
neers. At  that  time  he  was  only  17 
years  of  age.  His  father,  who  had 
recently  died,  had  not  joined  the 
Church,  but  was  not  antagonistic.  Bro. 
Kelsey  returned  to  Winter  Quarters 
with  Pres.  Brigham  Young  in  the  fall 
of  1847  and  found  that  during  his  ab- 
sence his  mother  and  one  of  his  sis- 
ters had  died.  He  came  back  to  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  1848  with  the  remain- 
der of  his  mother's  family.  He  had  by 
this  time  been  baptized  and  was  a 
faithful  member  of  the  Church  from 
that  time.  In  1850  he  went  to  Cali- 
fornia and  managed  to  wash  out  about 
$500  worth  of  gold,  but  only  stayed 
four  months.  Soon  after  his  return 
he  married  Lydia  Snyder,  who  proved 
a  devoted  wife  and  bore  him  eleven 
children.  He  located  at  Brigham  City 
in  the  fall  of  1856,  where  he  remained 
until  1864,  when  he  went  to  Bear  Lake 
Valley  on  a  colonization  mission  and 
died  at  Paris,  Idaho,  May  23,  1900. 

KENDALL,  Levi  Newel,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
April  19,  1822,  at  Lockport,  Niagara 
Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Levi  Kendall  and 


710 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Lorena  Lyman.  He  was  baptized  in 
Redford,  Michigan,  by  Elder  D.  B. 
Hurlbert,  in  October,  1842.  He  was 
ordained  a  Seventy  in  April,  1844,  at 
Nauvoo,  under  the  hands  of  Pres.  Jo- 
seph Young,  sen.,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  Michigan  the  same  year.  After  his 
arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  with 
the  pioneer  company  in  July,  1847, 
he  assisted  to  plow  the  land  and  plant 
crops  until  he  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters  with  Pres.  Young  in  the  fall 
of  the  same  year.  He  came  back  to 
the  "Valley"  in  1848,  and  married 
Elizabeth  Clemmons  in  Salt  Lake  City 
in  1851.  In  1856  he  became  a  resident 
of  Springville,  Utah,  where  he  assist- 
ed in  the  construction  of  canyon  roads 
and  irrigating  canals  and  from  which 
place  in  1861  he  went  to  the  Missouri 
River  with  Capt.  John  R.  Murdock  to 
bring  poor  saints  to  the  "Valley."  Bro. 
Kendall  died  at  Springville  March  10, 
1905,  survived  by  a  large  family. 

KLEINMAN,    Konrad,    one    of    the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
April  19,  1815,  in  Germany,  a  son  of 
Konrad  Kleinman  and  Odelia  Wissing. 
He  emigrated  to  America  when  quite 
young  and  becoming  a  convert  to  the 
gospel  was  baptized  Aug.  26,  1844,  by 
Dominicus  Carter  in  Indiana.  Being 
chosen  a  member  of  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  pioneer  band,  he  (from  the 
time  of  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley)  took  an  active  part  in  the  up- 
building of  Utah.  In  1855-56  he  filled 
a  mission  to  New  York,  and  in  1861 
was  called  to  southern  Utah  on  a  col- 
onization mission.  His  first  wife  had 
no  children,  but  later  he  married  Anna 
Benz  and  Mary  Ann  Garner  and  be- 
came the  father  of  thirteen  children. 
Bro.  Kleinman  was  ordained  a  Patri- 
arch in  September,  1891,  and  died  Nov. 
12,  1907,  at  St.  George,  Utah.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  661.) 

KIMBALL,  Ellen  Sanders,  one  of 
the  three  pioneer  women,  who,  under 
the  direction  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 


arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
July,  1847,  was  born  in  1824  in  the 
parish  of  Ten,  in  Thelemarken,  Nor- 
way, a  daughter  of  Ysten  Sondrasen. 
The  family  emigrated  to  America  in 
1837,  when  Ellen  was  about  thirteen 
years  old,  and  located  in  Indiana.  La- 
ter they  moved  to  La  Salle  County, 
Illinois,  where  Ellen  joined  the  Church 
in  1842.  She  became  the  wife  of  He- 
ber  C.  Kimball  in  the  Nauvoo  Temple 
Jan.  7,  1846,  shared  in  the  toils  and 
vicissitudes  of  the  saints  in  their  exo- 
dus from  Nauvoo  and  the  perils  of  the 
journey  across  the  plains.  Sister  Ellen 
S.  Kimball  and  Hans  Christian  Hansen 
were  the  only  Scandinavians  in  the 
original  pioneer  company.  Sister  Ellen 
became  the  mother  of  five  children, 
three  of  whom  died  in  infancy.  She 
died  Nov.  22,  1871,  in  Salt  Lake  City. 
(Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  772.) 

KIMBALL,    Heber   C,    one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
June  14,  1801,  at  Sheldon,  Franklin 
Co.,  Vermont,  a  son  of  Solomon  Farn- 
ham  Kimball  and  Anna  Spaulding.  He 
was  baptized  in  April,  1832,  by  Al- 
pheus  Giff'ord  and  ordained  an  Elder 
in  1832,  by  Joseph  Young.  He  was 
ordained  an  Apostle  Feb.  14,  1835, 
under  the  hands  of  Oliver  Cowdery, 
David  Whitmer  and  Martin  Harris. 
After  helping  to  establish  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Church  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  he  returned  with  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  to  Winter  Quarters, 
and  when  the  presidency  of  the 
Church  was  reoi'ganized  on  Dec.  24, 
1847,  Bro.  Kimball  was  selected  and 
set  apai't  as  first  counselor  to  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  which  position  he 
held  until  his  death  which  occurred 
in  Salt  Lake  City  June  22,  1868.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  34.) 

KING,  William  A.,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  a  member 
of  the  25th  Quorum  of  Seventy  organ- 
ized in  Nauvoo,  111.  He  was  chosen 
as  one  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  com- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


711 


pany  of  pioneers,  and  after  remaining 
a  short  time  in  the  "Valley"  returned 
to  Winter  Quarters,  Iowa,  with  Pres. 
Young  later  in  1847.  It  is  not  known 
that  he  ever  came  back  to  Utah;  he 
is  believed  to  have  died  in  Boston, 
Mass.,  in  1862. 

LAY,  Hark,  one  of  the  original  pio- 
neers of  Utah,  was  a  negro  servant  of 
Wm.  Lay,  a  wealthy  member  of  the 
Church  in  Monroe  County,  Mississippi, 
who  was  sent  with  three  other  ne- 
groes, servants  of  William  Crosby, 
John  H.  Bankhead  and  John  Brown, 
in  charge  of  Bro.  John  Brown,  with 
two  good  wagons  and  supplies,  to  as- 
sist Pres.  Brigham  Young  on  the  pio- 
neer journey.  Hark  Lay  at  that  time 
was  about  22  years  of  age.  He  re- 
mained in  the  western  country  and 
died  at  Union,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah, 
about  1890. 

LEWIS,  Tarleton,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  May 
18,  1805,  in  the  Pendleton  District 
(now  Anderson),  South  Carolina,  a 
son  of  Neriah  Lewis  and  Mary  Moss. 
He  moved  to  Kentucky  in  1809  and 
married  Malinda  Gimlin  March  27, 
1828.  He  was  baptized  by  his  brother, 
Benjamin  Lewis,  July  25,  1836.  In  1847 
he  was  chosen  as  one  of  the  pioneer 
company  in  charge  of  Pres.  Brigham 
Young.  After  arriving  in  the  Valley 
he  was  appointed  Bishop  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  which  position  he  held  until  Salt 
Lake  City  was  divided  into  several 
wards.  In  1850  he  was  called  to  assist 
in  locating  a  settlement  in  Little  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  and  thus  became  one  of 
the  founders  of  Parowan,  Iron  Coun- 
ty, where  he  acted  as  Bishop  until  the 
spring  of  1858  when  he  was  called  to 
settle  at  Minersville,  Beaver  County, 
Utah.  In  the  fall  of  1877  he  was  ap- 
pointed Bishop  of  the  Richfield  Sec- 
ond Ward  in  Sevier  County,  which  po- 
sition he  held  until  he  moved  to  Teas- 
dale,  Piute  County,  where  he  died  Nov. 
22,  1890. 


LITTLE,   Jesse  Carter,   one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Sept.  26,  1815,  in  Belmont,  Waldo  Co., 
Maine,  a  son  of  Thomas  and  Relief 
Little.  He  joined  the  Church  in  the 
Eastern  States  and  was  ordained  a 
High  Priest  April  17,  1845,  by  Parley 
P.  Pratt.  In  1846  Elder  Little  acted 
as  president  of  the  Eastern  States 
Mission.  Hearing  that  President  Polk 
was  contemplating  sending  a  company 
of  militia  to  the  seat  of  the  war  in 
California,  he  suggested  that,  since  the 
Latter-day  Saints  were  expecting  to 
locate  in  the  near  future  in  Upper 
California,  this  company  should  be 
drawn  from  the  ranks  of  the  "Mor- 
mons" encamped  on  the  banks  of  the 
Missouri  River.  This  led  to  the  call 
of  the  famous  "Mormon  Battalion"  in 
1846.  After  completing  his  mission 
in  the  East,  Elder  Little  was  called 
to  be  one  of  the  original  pioneer  com- 
pany in  1847.  After  his  return  to 
Winter  Quarters  with  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  in  the  fall  of  1847,  Elder  Little 
was  again  called  to  resume  his  presi- 
dency of  the  saints  in  the  Eastern 
States  and  did  not  return  to  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  again  until  1852.  For 
many  years  Bro.  Little  was  prominent 
in  ecclesiastical,  civil  and  military  af- 
fairs in  the  Territory  and  acted  as  a 
counselor  to  Presiding  Bishop  Edward 
Hunter  from  1856  to  1874.  He  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Dec.  26,  1893,  being 
survived  by  several  children.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  242,  and  Vol.  3,  p. 
151.) 

LOSEE,  Franklin  G.,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  in 
1815,  at  Belmont,  Waldo  Co.,  Maine. 
He  is  said  to  have  died  at  Lehi,  Utah, 
but  this  is  not  authenticated. 

LOVELAND,  Chauncey,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Oct.  1,  1797,  at  Glasgow,  Connecticut, 
a  son  of  Levi  and  Estes  Loveland.  At 
the  time  of  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  his  broth- 


712 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


er  Hyrum,  Chauncey  Loveland  lived 
in  Carthage,  Illinois.  He  was  not  then 
connected  with  the  Church,  but  well 
disposed  to  it,  extending  cordial  hos- 
pitality to  the  brethren  in  times  of 
need.  He  was  baptized  at  Mt.  Pis- 
gah,  Iowa,  in  1846,  and  came  to  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  in  1847  as  one  of 
the  pioneer  company.  Later  the  same 
year  he  returned  to  Winter  Quarters 
with  Pres.  Brigham  Young,  but  came 
back  to  the  "Valley"  soon  afterwards. 
He  located  at  Bountiful,  Salt  Lake  Co., 
and  was  successful  in  establishing  a 
good  home  and  was  the  father  of  a 
family  which  later  became  prominent 
in  official  circles  in  the  state.  He  was 
a  man  of  unwavering  faith  and  integ- 
rity to  the  work  of  the  Lord.  He  died 
at  Bountiful  Aug.  16,  1876. 

LYMAN,  Amasa  M.,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
March  30,  1815,  in  Lyman  township, 
Grafton  Co.,  New  Hampshire.  He  was 
baptized  April  27,  1832,  by  Lyman 
E.  Johnson  and  ordained  an  Apostle 
Aug.  20,  1842.  In  the  exodus  from 
Nauvoo  in  1846,  he  rendered  efficient 
service  and  as  one  of  the  pioneer  com- 
pany arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley 
in  July,  1847.  In  1850  he  assisted  in 
the  establishment  of  San  Bernardino, 
California,  but  while  on  a  mission  to 
Great  Britain  in  1861,  he  advocated 
false  doctrines  and  was  excommunicat- 
ed from  the  Church  May  12,  1870.  He 
died  in  Millard  County,  Utah,  Feb.  4, 
1877.     (Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  96.) 

MARBLE,   Samuel   Harvey,   one   of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Oct.  6,  1822,  at  Phelps,  Ontario 
Co.,  New  York,  a  son  of  Nathaniel 
Marble.  He  joined  the  Church  at  Nau- 
voo, 111.,  being  baptised  by  Chester 
Loveland.  After  coming  to  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  as  one  of  the  pioneers  in 
July,  1847,  he  returned  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters later  the  same  year  with  Pres. 
Brigham  Young.  Having  come  back 
to  the  "Valley"  he  was  called  in  1849 


as  one  of  a  company  of  nine  men,  in 
charge  of  Capt.  A.  L.  Lamoreaux,  to 
locate  for  a  few  months  on  Green  river 
to  ferry  California  and  Oregon  emi- 
grants over  the  river,  repair  wagons 
and  put  up  a  blacksmith  shop.  Hav- 
ing located  at  Manti,  Sanpete  Co.,  he 
was  elected  a  city  councilman  there  in 
1851  and  was  a  member  of  the  23rd 
Quorum  of  Seventy  in  1853.  Later 
he  moved  to  Round  Valley,  Apache 
Co.,  Arizona,  where  he  died  March  16, 
1914,  aged  92  years. 

MARK  HAM,  Stephen,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
9,  1800,  in  the  town  of  Avon,  Ontario 
(now  Livingston)  Co.,  New  York,  a 
son  of  David  Markham  and  Dinah 
Merry.  He  was  baptized  by  Elder 
Abel  Lamb  in  July,  1837,  and  remained 
steadfast  in  his  loyalty  to  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith,  whom  he  visited  in  the 
Carthage  jail  early  on  the  day  of  the 
martyrdom.  He  only  left  the  jail,  on 
an  errand  at  the  request  of  the  Proph- 
et, a  short  time  before  the  tragedy. 
Bro.  Markham  endured  much  perse- 
cution and  was  finally  driven  out  of 
Nauvoo  and,  with  the  other  exiled 
saints,  camped  at  Winter  Quarters 
where,  in  the  spring  of  1847,  he  was 
called  to  be  one  of  the  band  of  pio- 
neers. Later  in  the  same  year  he  left 
Great  Salt  Lake  City  with  Pres.  Brig- 
ham Young  and  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters,  but  came  back  to  the  "Val- 
ley" in  1850  in  charge  of  a  company 
of  saints.  Soon  after  his  arrival  he 
was  ordained  a  Bishop  by  Geo.  A. 
Smith  and  set  apart  to  preside  over 
the  infant  settlement  of  Palmyra  (the 
first  location  of  the  settlers  on  the 
Spanish  Fork  river.)  During  the  Walk- 
er Indian  war  Bro.  Markham  was  val- 
iant in  his  efforts  to  protect  the  set- 
tlers and  was  appointed  a  colonel  in 
the  Nauvoo  Legion  (or  local  militia). 
In  1856  he  was  called  on  a  colonizing 
mission  to  Fort  Supply,  near  Green 
River,  Wyoming,  and  assisted  in  or- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


713 


ganizing  the  first  express  line  across 
the  plains.  He  died  at  Spanish  Fork 
March  10,  1878,  being  survived  by  a 
large  family.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  676.) 

MATTHEWS,  Joseph,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Jan. 
29,  1809,  in  Johnson  County,  North 
Carolina.  He  embraced  the  gospel  in 
the  fall  of  1843,  and  moved  to  Nauvoo, 
111.,  where  he  worked  on  the  Temple 
and  filled  several  missions  to  the  East- 
ern States.  He  became  an  exile  from 
Nauvoo  in  1846,  and  while  encamped 
at  Winter  Quarters,  was  chosen  as  one 
of  Pres.  Brigham  Young's  company 
of  pioneers.  He  was  also  one  of  Orson 
Pratt's  advance  company  which  en- 
tered Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  ahead 
of  the  main  company  of  pioneers.  He 
was  a  member  of  Parley  P.  Pratt's 
exploration  party  in  southern  Utah 
in  1849.  In  1851  he  was  called.to  Cali- 
fornia with  Charles  C.  Rich  and 
Amasa  M.  Lyman  and  remained  in  San 
Bernardino  until  that  settlement  was 
abandoned  in  1857.  In  1869  and  1870 
he  filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern 
States  and  in  1880  moved  to  Arizona. 
He  died  at  Pima,  Graham  Co.,  Ari- 
zona, May  14,  1886. 

MILLS,  George,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  remained  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  City  after  he  had  made  his 
entrance  into  the  "Valley"  with  the 
pioneers  under  the  direction  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young.  There  is  nothing  on 
record  in  regard  to  Bro.  Mills  except 
that  he  had  been  suffering  severely 
from  cancer  when  on  Aug.  29,  1854,  he 
insisted  that  Dr.  Samuel  L.  Sprague 
should  operate  upon  him,  in  the  hope 
of  obtaining  relief.  The  doctor,  in 
consultation  with  three  other  physi- 
cians, concluded  that  such  an  opera- 
tion would  prove  fatal.  Pres.  Brig- 
ham Young  was  consulted  and  con- 
sented that  the  operation  should  be 
performed,  but  Bro.  Mills  died  while 


still  under  the  influence  of  chloroform. 
Before  the  operation  took  place  Bro. 
Mills  made  his  will  and  arranged  all 
his  affairs  himself. 

MURRAY,  Carlos,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  in 
1828  in  Ontario  County,  N.  Y.  After 
the  arrival  of  the  pioneer  company  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  he  assisted  in 
establishing  the  little  colony  in  their 
Rocky  Mountain  home  and  later  the 
same  year  returned  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters with  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  In 
1848  he  came  back  with  Pres.  Young, 
and  when  some  little  distance  from 
the  city  went  ahead  to  secure  needed 
supplies.  Some  time  later  he  went 
to  California,  and  on  his  return  re- 
ported that  one  of  his  company  had 
been  killed  by  Indians.  The  man  had 
gone  back  to  the  encampment  of  the 
previous  night  to  fetch  his  serape  (In- 
dian blanket)  and  was  killed  by  an 
arrow  from  one  of  the  Indians.  In 
1856,  Carlos  Murray,  his  wife  and  a 
man  named  Redden,  met  a  similar 
fate,  near  the  Humboldt  River  (now 
in  Nevada).  The  report  of  the  trag- 
edy was  sent  in  by  some  U.  S.  sur- 
veyors, and  investigation  disclosed  a 
gold  pencil  and  an  ear  ring  which  A. 
P.  Hawes  identified  as  the  property 
of  his  sister,  wife  of  Carlos  Murray, 
and  Bro.  Murray's  pistols  were  found 
in  the  possession  of  some  travelers 
who  said  they  bought  them  from  In- 
dians on  the  desert. 

NEWMAN,  Elijah,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 
17,  1793,  in  Hampshire  County,  Vir- 
ginia, a  son  of  Solomon  and  Jane 
Newman.  After  his  arrival  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  with  the  pioneer 
company,  he  assisted  in  the  construc- 
tion of  a  fort,  known  later  as  the  "Old 
Fort"  and  was  called  to  provide  gates 
for  the  enclosure.  In  1850  he  was  se- 
lected as  one  of  a  company  appointed 
to  colonize  Little  Salt  Lake  Valley,  and 


714 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


thus  became  a  pioneer  settler  of  Paro- 
wan.  In  1851  he  was  called  to  make 
further  explorations  in  Iron  County. 
He  was  a  speaker  at  a  conference  held 
in  Salt  Lake  City  in  1852,  at  which 
time  he  was  a  resident  of  Parowan 
and  was  later  appointed  Justice  of  the 
Peace  there.  He  died  at  Parowan  Dec. 
12,  1872. 

NORTON,  John  Wesley,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  6,  1820,  near  New  Lisbon,  Henry 
Co.,  Indiana,  a  son  of  David  and  Eliza- 
beth Norton.  He  was  one  of  the  fam- 
ous hunters  of  the  camp  and  active 
in  securing  game.  After  his  arrival 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  July, 
1847,  he  assisted  to  establish  the  col- 
ony and  to  prepare  accommodations 
for  the  nine  companies  of  saints  al- 
ready en  route  to  join  the  first  or  pio- 
neer company.  From  1854  to  1857  El- 
der Norton  filled  a  mission  to  Aus- 
tralia. Upon  his  return  he  was  called 
on  various  exploration  trips  and  was 
appointed  to  assist  in  the  settlement 
of  southern  Utah  and  became  for  a 
time  a  resident  of  Panaca  (now  in  Ne- 
vada). He  died  at  Panguitch,  Gar- 
field Co.,  Utah,  Oct.  20,  1901,  survived 
by  several  children. 

OWEN,  Seeley,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  March  20, 
1805,  at  Multon,  Rutland  County,  Ver- 
mont, a  son  of  Ethan  and  Hannah 
Owen.  After  arriving  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  July,  1847,  he  remain- 
ed there  only  a  few  weeks  as  he  re- 
turned to  Winter  Quarters  with  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  later  the  same  year. 
On  July  24,  1854,  he  gave  a  pioneer 
speech  at  a  celebration  at  Union,  Salt 
Lake  Co.  He  lived  for  some  time  at 
Wallsburg,  in  Provo  Valley,  and  was 
accidentally  killed  while  working  on 
the  Atlantic-Pacific  Railroad  near 
Flagstaff,  Arizona,  in  1881. 

PACK,  John,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  May  20, 


1809,  at  St.  Johns,  New  Brunswick, 
Canada,  a  son  of  George  Pack  and 
Philotte  Green.  He  removed  with  his 
parents  at  the  age  of  eight  years  into 
the  State  of  New  York,  where  he  mar- 
ried Julia  Ivies  Oct.  10,  1832,  and  to- 
gether with  his  wife  was  baptized 
March  8,  1836,  by  Elder  James  Blakes- 
ley.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  in  the 
same  year  under  the  hands  of  Orson 
Pratt  and  Luke  S.  Johnson,  and  was 
an  active  member  of  the  local  Priest- 
hood. While  residing  in  Nauvoo,  111., 
he  performed  several  short  missions 
to  the  Eastern  States,  and  at  the  time 
of  the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet  and 
his  brother,  was  laboring  with  Ezra  T. 
Benson  on  a  mission  in  New  Jersey. 
After  the  exodus  of  the  saints  from 
Nauvoo  he  •^as  chosen  as  one  of  the 
pioneer  company  and  arrived  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  in  July,  1847.  Later 
the  same  year  he  went  back  to  Winter 
Quarters  and  returned  in  1848  with 
his  family.  He  built  a  home  in  the 
17th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  helped  to 
build  Chase's  mill  in  Liberty  Park, 
built  the  first  dancing  hall  in  Utah, 
in  which  Livingston  and  Kincaid  open- 
ed the  first  store.  In  1856  he  helped 
to  settle  Carson  Valley  (Nevada)  and 
was  a  member  of  the  Deseret  Agri- 
cultural and  Manufacturing  Society. 
He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  April  4, 
1885,  being  survived  by  a  large  family, 

PEIRCE,  Eli  Harvey,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  July 
29,  1827,  at  Uwchland,  Chester  Co., 
Pa.,  a  son  of  Robert  Peii'ce  and  Han- 
nah Harvey.  He  was  baptized  March 
27,  1842,  by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
and  after  his  arrival  in  Utah  he  be- 
came the  second  Bishop  of  Brigham 
City.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  686.) 

POMEROY,  Francis  M.,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Feb.  22,  1822,  at  Somers,  Tollard  Co., 
Conn.,  a  son  of  Martin  Pomeroy  and 
Sybil  Hunt.  After  arriving  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley,  he  engaged  in  many 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


715 


pioneer  enterprises,  operated  a  saw 
mill,  shingle  and  lath  business,  served 
as  a  missionary  to  the  Indians  and  died 
at  Mesa,  Arizona,  Feb.  28,  1883,  sur- 
vived by  a  large  family.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  488.) 

POWELL,  David,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  May 
26,  1822,  in  the  Edgefield  District, 
South  Carolina,  a  son  of  John  and 
Rebecca  Powell.  He  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  and  became  a  member  of  the 
24th  Quorum  of  Seventy,  organized 
in  Nauvoo.  After  arriving  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  with  the  pioneers  in 
July,  1847,  he  returned  to  Winter  Quar- 
ters with  Pres.  Brigham  Young  later 
the  same  year  and  came  back  to  Utah 
in  1853  with  his  wife  (Ann)  and  son 
(David,  jun.)  Later  he  went  to  Cali- 
fornia and  died  near  Santa  Rosa,  be- 
tween 1881  and  1885. 

PRATT,  Orson,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah  and  one  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles  at  that  time,  was 
born  Sept.  19, 1811,  at  Hartford,  Wash- 
ington Co.,  New  York,  a  son  of  Jared 
Pratt  and  Charity  Dickenson.  Bro. 
Pratt  was  sent  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  in  charge  of  a  group  of  men  to 
act  as  an  advance  company  to  look 
out  and  prepare  a  road  for  the  main 
body  to  enter  Salt  Lake  Valley.  On 
July  21,  1847,  he  and  Erastus  Snow, 
with  only  one  horse  between  them, 
came  down  Emigration  canyon  ahead 
of  their  companies  and  beheld  in  the 
distance  the  blue  waters  of  the  Great 
Salt  Lake.  Elder  Snow  wrote  later: 
"We  simultaneously  swung  our  hats 
and  shouted,  'Hosannah.'  "  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.   1,  p.  87.) 

RAPPLEYE,  Tunis,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  in 
1807  in  the  State  of  New  York,  a  son 
of  John  Rappleye  and  Margaret  Tellie. 
He  was  associated  with  the  Church  in 
Kirtland,  Ohio,  where  he  married 
Louisa  Cutler,  who  became  the  moth- 


er of  eight  children.  After  his  arrival 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  for  many 
years  he  was  in  the  employ  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  as  a  head  gardener. 
He  also  served  as  a  missionary  to  the 
Eastern  States,  as  a  member  of  the 
Utah  Militia  while  protecting  the  set- 
tlers against  Indian  depredations,  and 
as  a  teamster  in  going  to  the  Mis- 
souri River  to  bring  emigrants  to 
Utah.  Bro.  Tunis  Rappleye  died  at  Ka- 
nosh,  Utah,  Dec.  25,  1883.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  798.) 

REDDEN,   Return  Jackson,  one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Sept.  1816,  at  Hiram,  Portage 
Co.,  Ohio,  a  son  of  George  Grant  Red- 
den and  Adelia  Higley.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  1841  at  Nauvoo  and  endured 
the  trials  consequent  upon  the  exodus 
of  the  saints  from  that  city.  In  pass- 
ing through  what  is  now  Uinta  Coun- 
ty, Wyoming,  Bro.  Redden  discovered 
a  curious  cave  now  known  as  Cache 
Cave,  but  which  for  some  time  was 
known  as  Redden's  Cave.  After  his 
arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  he 
assisted  in  planting  crops,  and,  later 
the  same  year,  returned  with  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  to  Winter  Quarters. 
He  came  back  in  1848  with  his  fam- 
ily, and  in  1849  accompanied  Apostle 
Amasa  M.  Lyman  to  California,  and, 
returning  by  way  of  Carson  Valley, 
he  lived  there  two  years.  He  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  3rd  Quorum  of  Seventy.  He 
lived  successively  in  Tooele  and  Sum- 
mit counties,  serving  as  a  justice  of 
the  peace  in  both.  He  died  at  Hoyts- 
ville.  Summit  Co.,  Utah,  Aug.  30,  1891, 
survived  by  a  large  family. 

RICHARDS,  Willard,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  June 
24,  1804,  in  Hopkinton,  Middlesex  Co., 
Mass.,  a  son  of  Joseph  Richards  and 
Rhoda  Howe.  He  was  baptized  by 
Brigham  Young  (his  cousin)  at  Kirt- 
land, Ohio,  Dec.  31,  1836.  He  was  a 
physician  by  profession,  and  in  1841 


716 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


was  appointed  to  act  as  secretary  to 
the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith,  and  was 
with  him  in  Carthage  Jail  at  the  time 
of  the  martyrdom  of  the  Prophet  and 
his  brother  Hyrum,  June  27,  1844.  Dr. 
Richards  was  selected  as  second  coun- 
selor to  Pres.  Brigham  Young  at  the 
reorganization  of  the  First  Presidency 
Dec.  27,  1847,  and  after  the  establish- 
ment of  a  local  government  in  the 
Great  Basin,  he  served  as  secretary 
of  the  Provisional  Government  of  the 
State  of  Deseret,  and  of  the  Territory 
of  Utah.  He  was  also  postmaster  of 
Great  Salt  Lake  City  and  historian 
and  recoi'der  for  the  Church.  He  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City  March  11,  1854,  sur- 
vived by  several  children.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  53.) 

ROCKWELL,  Orrin  Porter,  one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  June  25,  1815,  in  the  State  of 
New  York,  a  son  of  Orrin  Rockwell 
and  Sarah  Ivory.  He  was  baptized  in 
Fayette,  Seneca  Co.,  N.  Y.,  soon  after 
the  organization  of  the  Church  and 
was  with  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
just  previous  to  the  arrest  of  the 
Prophet  and  his  martyrdom,  and 
would  have  followed  him  to  Carthage 
but  for  a  special  message  from  the 
Prophet  that  he  should  remain  in  Nau- 
voo.  On  the  pioneer  journey,  Orrin 
Porter  Rockwell  rendered  signal  ser- 
vice as  a  hunter.  He  was  one  of  Or- 
son Pratt's  advance  company  which 
entered  the  "Valley"  ahead  of  the  main 
body  of  the  pioneers.  He  had  consid- 
erable influence  with  the  Indians  and 
many  times  was  instrumental  in  mak- 
ing peace  with  them  and  saving  the 
settlers  from  disaster.  He  was  also 
closely  associated  with  the  overland 
mail  company  and  the  pony  express 
riders.  One  of  the  mail  stations  was 
located  at  his  home  25  miles  southwest 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  He  served  as  dep- 
uty marshal  of  Salt  Lake  City  for  a 
number  of  years  and  died  there  June 
9,  1878. 


ROCKWOOD,     Albert    Perry,    one 

of  the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  June  5,  1805,  in  Holliston,  Middle- 
sex Co.,  Mass.,  a  son  of  Luther  Rock- 
wood  and  Ruth  Perry.  He  was  bap- 
tized in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  July  25,  1837, 
by  Brigham  Young.  He  was  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  Jan.  5,  1836,  and  set 
apart  as  one  of  the  First  Seven  Presi- 
dents of  Seventies  at  Nauvoo  De''.  2, 
1845.  In  Utah  he  served  as  warden 
of  the  Territorial  Penitentiary  for  fif- 
teen years,  served  in  the  Territorial 
Legislature  and  director  of  the  Des- 
eret Agricultural  and  Manufacturing 
Society.  He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City 
Nov.  25,  1879,  survived  by  a  large 
family.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 
194.) 

ROLFE,  Benjamin  Williams,  one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Oct.  7,  1822,  at  Romford,  Ox- 
ford Co.,  Maine.  His  father  having 
embraced  the  fullness  of  the  Gospel 
in  Maine,  moved  to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in 
the  fall  of  1834,  and  later  to  Nauvoo, 
Illinois.  When  the  pioneer  company 
was  organized  at  Winter  Quarters  the 
father  of  Benjamin  W.  Rolfe  was  one 
of  the  men  selected  to  go,  but  Benja- 
min W.,  having  just  arrived  at  Winter 
Quarters  from  the  East,  was  permit- 
ted to  take  his  father's  place.  At  that 
time  he  was  not  a  member  of  the 
Church.  He  arrived  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  with  the  Pioneer  com- 
pany in  July,  1847,  and  later  in  the 
year  returned  to  Winter  Quarters  with 
Pres.  Brigham  Young.  When  the 
company  arrived  at  Chimney  Rock, 
Bi-o.  Rolfe  was  selected  as  one  of 
two  men  to  go  on  to  Salt  Lake  City 
with  Bro.  John  Y.  Greene  to  carry 
mail.  Later  Bro.  Rolfe  took  part 
in  the  Salmon  River  Mission  to  the 
Indians,  and  helped  to  establish  Fort 
Supply.  After  his  retui-n,  he  located 
in  Salt  Lake  City  where  he  worked  as 
a  carpenter  and  was  a  member  of  the 
16th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  He  was  of 
a  retiring  disposition  and  took  no  par- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


717 


ticular  part  in  public  affairs,  but  was 
esteemed  for  his  honesty  and  general 
straightforwardness.  He  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City  May  31,  1892. 

ROOKER,  Joseph,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  remained  in 
Salt  Lake  Valley  for  some  time  and 
was  a  member  of  a  committee  to  take 
teams  to  meet  the  on-coming  compa- 
nies, relieve  them  of  their  loads  and 
assist  them  to  reach  their  destination. 
Later  he  resided  at  Black  Rock,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  and  was  a  member  of  the 
9th  Quorum  of  Seventy.  About  1857 
he  went  to  California. 

ROUNDY,  Shadrach,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Jan. 

1,  1789,  at  Rockingham,  Windham  Co., 
Vermont.  He  presided  as  Bishop  over 
the  16th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
from  1849  to  1856,  and  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City  July  4,  1872.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  642.) 

SCHOFIELD,  Joseph  Smith,  one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Aug.  2,  1809,  in  Winchester  Co., 
New  York.  He  was  a  carpenter  by 
trade  and  in  many  ways  assisted  the 
pioneer  company  by  repairing  wagons, 
etc.,  as  well  as  by  being  the  driver  of 
one  of  the  wagons.  After  coming  to 
Utah  he  plied  his  trade  in  different 
parts  of  Salt  Lake  County,  and  when 
the  settlements  of  southern  Utah  were 
being  established  went  to  Utah's  Dixie 
and  later  located  at  Bellevue,  Wash- 
ington Co.,  where  he  died  March  8, 
1875,  i-espected  and  loved  by  all  who 
knew  him. 

SCHOLES,  George,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 

2,  1812,  at  Chadderton,  Lancashire, 
England,  a  son  of  George  and  Sarah 
Scholes.  He  was  baptized  Nov.  3, 1839, 
by  Thomas  Miller  and  confirmed  by 
William  Clayton.  Emigrating  to 
America,  he  arrived  at  Nauvoo  April 
18,  1841,  with  his  wife  and  one  child, 


and  was  ordained  an  Elder  at  the 
April  Conference  of  1842,  by  George 
A.  Smith.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  became  a  member  of  the  23rd 
Quorum  of  Seventy  in  Nauvoo,  in  1845. 
At  Nauvoo  he  bought  a  city  lot  and 
erected  a  brick  house;  he  also  planted 
and  cultivated  many  fine  fruit  trees 
on  his  lot.  His  wife  and  three  children 
died  at  Nauvoo.  Being  selected  as 
one  of  the  pioneer  company  after  the 
expulsion  of  the  saints  from  Nauvoo, 
upon  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  he  prepa,red  land  for  planting 
potatoes,  peas,  beans  and  other  vege- 
tables, and  helped  in  the  construction 
of  the  old  fort  for  protection  against 
Indians.  He  went  back  to  Winter 
Quarters  in  the  fall  of  1847  with  Pres. 
Young,  and  being  appointed  to  some 
particular  business  at  St.  Louis,  Mo., 
did  not  return  to  Salt  Lake  City  until 
1850,  when  he  brought  with  him  his 
newly  wedded  wife,  Mary  Spencer,  to 
whom  he  had  been  united  in  marriage 
at  Council  Bluffs  by  Elder  Orson  Hyde. 
The  family  located  in  Cottonwood,  Salt 
Lake  Co.,  where  Bro.  Scholes  died 
Aug.  14,  1857,  leaving  a  wife  and  four 
little  children. 

SHERWOOD,  Henry  G.,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  asso- 
ciated with  the  Latter-day  Saints  in 
the  early  days  of  Nauvoo  and  was  one 
of  those  who  contracted  malaria  fever 
when  the  saints  were  first  established 
at  Commerce  (as  it  was  then  called) 
Henry  G.  Sherwood  was  instantly 
healed  at  that  time  under  the  hands 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  Later, 
he  was  appointed  city  marshal  at  Nau- 
voo. He  endured  trials  with  the  saints 
during  their  expulsion  from  Nauvoo, 
and  was  selected  as  one  of  the  pioneer 
company.  On  the  journey  he  was  ap- 
pointed commissary  general  for  the 
camp  and  after  his  arrival  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  made  the  drawing 
of  the  first  survey  of  Salt  Lake  City. 
Having  no  paper  of  suitable  size,  this 
important  document  was  drawn  on  a 


718 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


prepared  sheep's  skin.  Elder  Sher- 
wood also  became  a  member  of  the 
first  High  Council  in  Salt  Lake  Valley. 
He  was  a  speaker  at  the  Independence 
Day  celebration  in  Salt  Lake  City  July 
4,  1852.  In  September,  1852,  he  left 
Salt  Lake  City  for  San  Bernardino, 
California,  to  survey  a  ranch  recently 
purchased  by  the  Church  as  a  place  of 
settlement  for  the  saints,  and  in  July, 
1853,  was  appointed  surveyor  for  San 
Bernardino  County.  In  1856,  owing  to 
the  Johnston  army  troubles,  the  saints 
in  San  Bernardino  returned  to  Utah, 
and  Bro.  Sherwood  became  agent  in 
Salt  Lake  City  for  the  Pony  Express 
Company.  Later  he  returned  to  San 
Bernardino,  where  he  died  about  1862. 

SHUMWAY,  Andrew  Parley,  one  of 

the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Feb.  20,  1833,  at  Millbury,  Wor- 
cester Co.,  Mass.,  a  son  of  Charles 
Shumway  and  Julia  Ann  Hooker.  Thus 
it  will  be  seen  that  he  was  a  lad  of 
only  14  years  of  age,  when  he  arrived 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley.  He  was 
baptized  by  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith 
in  Nauvoo,  but  his  mother  having  died 
at  Winter  Quarters,  he  was  allowed  to 
accompany  his  father  to  the  mountains 
and  is  reported  to  have  been  a  willing 
and  active  member  of  the  pioneer  band. 
He  and  his  father  were  pioneers  of 
Sanpete  County,  Utah.  He  filled  a 
short  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1856- 
1857  but  was  recalled  on  account  of 
the  Johnston  Army  troubles.  In  1858 
he  married  Amanda  Graham  and  lo- 
cated at  Mendon,  in  Cache  County, 
his  being  one  of  eight  families  who 
were  pioneers  of  that  settlement,  over 
which  he  was  called  to  preside  as  Bish- 
op in  1859.  This  position  he  held  un- 
til 1872,  when  he  was  called  on  another 
mission  to  Great  Britain.  In  1863  he 
married  Mary  Ann  Christian  and  in 
1874  moved  to  Franklin,  Oneida  Co., 
Idaho,  where  he  died  June  12,  1909, 
survived  by  a  large  family. 


SHUMWAY,    Charles,    one    of   the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Aug.  1,  1806,  at  Oxford,  Worcester  Co., 
Mass.,  a  son  of  Samuel  and  Polly 
Shumway.  He  embraced  the  gospel  in 
Illinois  about  the  year  1840,  and  soon 
afterwards  moved  to  Nauvoo,  where 
he  took  an  active  part  in  defending 
the  saints  against  mob  violence,  being 
one  of  the  city  police.  He  was  the  first 
to  cross  the  Mississippi  River  with  ex- 
iles from  Nauvoo  in  February,  1846, 
and  assisted  to  establish  them  at  Win- 
ter Quarters.  When  he  was  selected 
as  a  member  of  the  pioneer  company, 
he  asked  that  his  son,  Andrew  P. 
Shumway,  then  a  boy  14  years  of  age, 
might  accompany  him,  which  he  did, 
the  boy's  mother  having  died  at  Win- 
ter Quarters  a  few  months  before.  Af- 
ter a  short  sojourn  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  he  and  his  young  son  returned 
later  the  same  year  (1847)  with  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  to  Winter  Quarters. 
Having  again  come  to  the  "Valley" 
Bro.  Shumway  became  a  pioneer  of 
Manti,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  in  1849,  and 
served  as  a  member  of  the  legislature, 
representing  Sanpete  County.  Bro. 
Shumway  filled  two  missions,  one  to 
Canada  and  one  to  the  Eastern  States 
and  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of 
Mendon,  Cache  County,  Utah,  in  1859. 
He  also  assisted  in  founding  settle- 
ments in  southern  Utah  and  in  1880 
erected  a  grist  mill  on  the  present  site 
of  Shumway,  near  Taylor,  Arizona, 
which  settlement  was  named  in  his 
honor.  Elder  Shumway  died  at  John- 
son, Kane  County,  Utah,  May  21,  1898, 
survived  by  a  large  family, 

SMITH,  George  Albert,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
June  26,  1817,  at  Potsdam,  St.  Law- 
rence Co.,  New  York,  a  son  of  Patri- 
arch John  Smith  and  Clarissa  Lyman. 
He  was  a  member  of  the  Council  of 
Twelve  Apostles  at  the  time  he  made 
the  pioneer  journey,  and  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Sept.  1,  1875.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.   1,  p.  37.) 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


719 


SMOOT,  William  C.  A.,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  30,  1828,  in  the  State  of  Tennes- 
see. He  was  baptized  Feb.  8,  1836, 
by  Henry  G.  Sherwood.  After  his 
arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
Bro.  Smoot  spent  the  winter  of  1847- 
1848  in  the  North  Fort  and  later  set- 
tled permanently  in  the  Sugar  House 
Ward.  In  1856  he  was  set  apart  as  a 
counselor  to  Abraham  O.  Smoot,  Bish- 
op of  the  Sugar  House  Ward.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  711.) 

SNOW,  Erastus,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Nov.  9, 
1818,  at  St.  Johnsbury,  Caledonia  Co., 
Vermont,  a  son  of  Levi  and  Lucina 
Snow.  As  a  member  of  the  advance 
company  of  the  pioneers  he  and  Orson 
Pratt,  one  riding  a  horse  and  the  other 
walking,  came  down  Emigration  can- 
yon and  entered  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
being  the  first  two  men  of  the  com- 
pany to  see  and  explore  the  tract, 
which  appeared  to  them  a  beautiful 
country.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p. 
103.) 

STEVENS,  Roswell,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Oct. 
17,  1809,  at  Grand  River,  Upper  Can- 
ada, a  son  of  Roswell  Stevens  and  Sib- 
bell  Spencer.  He  was  converted  by 
the  preaching  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith  and  Sidney  Rigdon  and  was 
baptized  in  the  spring  of  1834  by 
John  P.  Greene.  Later,  he  and  his 
family,  consisting  of  his  wife  and  five 
children,  located  at  Nauvoo,  where  he 
served  as  a  member  of  the  police  force. 
After  the  exodus  of  the  saints  from 
Nauvoo,  Bro.  Stevens  was  one  of  the 
men  who  enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion. He  traveled  with  his  company 
as  far  as  Santa  Fe  when  he,  John  D. 
Lee  and  Howard  Egan  were  appointed 
to  return  to  Winter  Quarters  and  take 
money  contributed  by  members  of  the 
Battalion  to  assist  the  saints.  In  the 
spring  of  1847,  Bro.  Stevens  was  sel- 


lected  as  one  of  the  pioneer  company 
and  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake- Valley 
in  July,  1847.  He  returned  to  Win- 
ter Quarters  later  the  same  year  with 
President  Brigham  Young  and  was 
specially  appointed  to  care  for  the 
families  of  the  Mormon  Battalion  men 
until  they  could  be  sent  on  to  Salt 
Lake  Valley.  In  due  time  he  too  came 
back  to  Utah  and  died  at  Bluff  City, 
San  Juan  Co.,  Utah,  May  4,  1880, 
as  a  faithful  member  of  the  Church. 

STEWART,  Benjamin  Franklin,  one 

of  the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  Oct.  22,  1817,  on  the  bank  of  the 
Ohio  River,  in  Jackson  township,  Mis- 
souri. He  was  baptized  Feb.  2,  1844, 
after  which  he  and  his  family  united 
with  the  saints  and  after  being  exiled 
from  Nauvoo,  he  was  chosen  as  one 
of  the  pioneer  company.  En  route, 
he  was  one  of  ten  men  left  at  the  Up- 
per Platte  Ferry  for  the  purpose  of 
ferrying  the  saints  who  followed, 
across  the  river.  In  due  time  his  wife 
and  children,  traveling  in  Abraham  0. 
Smoot's  company,  came  to  the  ferry 
and  he  went  on  to  Salt  Lake  Valley 
with  them.  He  became  one  of  the 
founders  of  Payson,  Utah  Co.,  Utah, 
where  he  served  as  mayor  two  terms, 
and  later  was  one  of  the  founders  of 
Benjamin,  Utah  Co.,  which  was  named 
in  his  honor,  and  of  which  settlement 
he  was  the  first  presiding  Elder.  He 
died  at  Benjamin  June  22,  1885,  being 
struck  by  lightning.  He  was  survived 
by  his  wife  and  several  children.  (Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  717.) 

STEWART,  James  W.,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
May  19,  1825,  in  Fayette  County,  Ala- 
bama, a  son  of  George  Stewart  and 
Ruth  Baker.  He  and  his  parents  and 
other  members  of  the  family  were  bap- 
tized May  25,  1842,  by  Benjamin 
Clapp  in  Alabama.  When  the  pioneer 
company  arrived  at  the  Platte  River, 
he,  with  nine  other  men  was  left  to 


720 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


operate  a  ferry  which  he  had  helped 
to  construct  and  on  which  the  on-com- 
ing companies  were  to  cross  the  river. 
After  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  he  assisted  to  construct  irriga- 
tion ditches.  Later,  he  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  Stales,  where  he  met 
Jane  Grover,  a  daughter  of  Thomas 
Grover,  whom  he  married  and  located 
in  Farmington.  Later  he  lived  in  Mor- 
gan County  and  died  March  22,  1913, 
in  Cokeville,  Wyoming,  at  the  home 
of  one  of  his  daughters. 

STRINGHAM,  Briant,  one  of  the 
original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
March  28,  1825,  at  Windsor,  Broome 
Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of 'George  Stringham 
and  Polly  Hendrickson.  After  his  ar- 
rival in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  he  lo- 
cated there  and  helped  to  plant  trees, 
build  houses  and  otherwise  develop  the 
place.  He  was  a  lover  of  animals,  could 
recognize  fine  points  in  stock,  and  en- 
gaged in  horse  trading.  He  was  ap- 
pointed Probate  Judge  of  Cache  Coun- 
ty in  1856,  but  still  engaged  in  raising 
fine  stock  and  at  the  Fair,  fostered 
by  the  Deseret  Agricultural  and  Man- 
ufacturing Company,  he  won  prizes 
for  his  exhibits  in  1857.  For  fifteen 
years  he  had  charge  of  the  tithing 
stock  of  the  Church  and  during  the  In- 
dian wars  had  charge  of  the  commis- 
sary department.  He  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Aug.  4,  1871,  survived  by  a 
large  family. 

SUMME,  Gilbard,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Aug. 
22,  1802,  a  son  of  John  and  Caroline 
Summe.  After  arriving  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley,  he  resided  for  some 
time  in  Great  Salt  Lake  City  where  he 
on  April  6,  1850,  was  sustained  as  a 
counselor  in  the  general  presidency  of 
the  Deacons.  This  position  he  held 
for  some  time.  In  1865  he  was  called 
on  the  Muddy  Mission  and  with  his 
family  resided  at  St.  Joseph,  a  now 
defunct  settlement  in  Moapa  Valley. 


Bro.  Summe  died  June  13, 1867,  at  Har- 
risburg,  Washington  Co.,  Utah. 

TAFT,  Seth,  one  of  the  original  pio- 
neers of  Utah,  was  born  Aug.  11,  179Q, 
a  son  of  Seth  and  Lydia  Taft.  After 
his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley 
he  became  Bishop  of  the  9th  Ward  in 
Salt  Lake  City  and  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Nov.  23,  1863,  as  a  Patriarch. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  798.) 

TANNER,  Thomas,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  March 
31,  1804,  in  Bristol,  Gloucestershire, 
England,  a  son  of  William  and  Judea 
Tanner.  He  emigrated  to  America  in 
1831,  was  married  in  1834,  and  was 
baptized  at  New  Rochell,  Winchester 
Co.,  New  York,  in  1841.  He  went  to 
Nauvoo  and,  with  the  saints,  located 
in  that  beautiful  city,  was  forced  to 
leave  his  home  and  journeyed  toward 
the  West  as  far  as  the  Missouri  River 
in  1846.  He  spent  the  winter  of  1846- 
1847  there,  and  in  1847  was  called  to 
be  one  of  the  pioneer  company.  With 
Pres.  Young  he  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters  in  1847  and  came  back  to  Salt 
Lake  Valley  with  his  family  in  1848. 
He  then  set  to  work  making  adobes, 
and  after  building  a  house  and  shop 
commenced  work  as  a  blacksmith.  La- 
ter he  became  foreman  of  the  Church 
blacksmith  shop  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
which  position  he  held  until  his  death, 
which  occurred  Aug.  2,  1855,  in  Salt 
Lake  City. 

TAYLOR,  Norman,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Sept. 
18,  1828,  at  Grafton,  Lorraine  Coi, 
Ohio.  He  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Valley 
in  July,  1847,  and  later  in  the  year  re- 
turned to  Winter  Quarters  with  Pres. 
Brigham  Young.  He  came  back  to  Salt 
Lake  Valley  with  his  wife,  Lurana  For- 
bush,  and  located  for  a  time  in  Salt 
Lake  City.  In  1850,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
he  married  Lydia  Forbush,  a  sister  of 
Lurana.  In  the  early  fifties  he  went 
to    San    Bernardino,   California,   with 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


721 


Apostle  Amasa  M.  Lyman  and  re- 
turned to  Utah  with  him  in  1857,  the 
saints  in  San  Bernardino  being  called 
back  to  Utah  on  account  of  the  John- 
ston Army  troubles.  Bro.  Taylor  died 
at  Moab,  Grand  Co.,  Utah,  Nov.  25, 
1899,  survived  by  a  large  family. 

THOMAS,    Rabert   T.,    one    of    the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  8,  1822,  at  Richmond,  North  Caro- 
lina, a  son  of  Henry  Thomas  and  Esther 
Taylor.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  12,  1844, 
and  after  arriving  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley,  filled  many  positions  of  honor 
in  the  community.  For  eleven  years  he 
was  justice  of  the  peace  at  Provo  and 
died  there  Feb.  28,  1892.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  723.) 

THORNTON,  Horace,  one  of  the  or- 
iginal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  May 
7,  1822,  at  Hinsdale,  Catteraugus  Co., 
N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Ezra  Thornton  and 
Harriet  Goodrich.  He  was  one  of  the 
first  of  the  pioneer  company  to  enter 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  being  one  of 
Orson  Pratt's  vanguard  of  42  men, 
which  preceded  the  main  body.  He  was 
a  member  of  the  20th  Quorum  of  Sev- 
enty in  Nauvoo  and  later  became  a 
member  of  the  69th  Quorum  of  Sev- 
enty in  Utah.  He  died  at  Manti,  San- 
pete Co.,  Utah,  March  21,  1914,  sur- 
vived by  a  large  family. 

THORPE,  Marcus  Ball,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
June  12,  1822,  at  New  Haven,  Conn. 
Having  become  a  member  of  the 
Church,  he  left  his  native  town  in  1846 
and  joined  the  exiled  saints  at  Winter 
Quarters.  He  arrived  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  in  July,  1847,  and  return- 
ed to  Winter  Quarters  later  the  same 
year  with  Pres.  Brigham  Young.  He 
came  back  in  1848  and  the  following 
year  went  to  California,  where  he  se- 
cured what  he  thought  would  be  mon- 
ey enough  to  bring  his  parents  and 
family  to  Utah.  This  money  he  placed 
in  a  belt  which  he  wore  when  he  left 


California  in  1851,  but  on  the  voyage 
he  fell  overboard  and  was  drowned. 
His  body  and  money  were  not  recov- 
ered. 

TIPPETS,  John  Harvey,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Sept.  5,  1810,  in  Wittingham,  Rocking- 
ham Co.,  New  Hampshire,  a  son  of 
John  Tippets  and  Abigail  Pierce.  He 
was  baptized  in  March,  1832.  After 
being  exiled  from  Nauvoo  he  arrived 
at  Winter  Quarters,  where  he  joined 
the  Mormon  Battalion  and  traveled 
with  his  company  to  Pueblo.  On  the 
23rd  of  December,  1846,  he  and  Thos. 
Woolsey  started  from  Pueblo  for  Win- 
ter Quarters  to  carry  money,  mail  and 
dispatches  to  the  saints.  The  follow- 
ing spring  he  was  selected  to  be  one  of 
the  pioneer  company.  He  died  at 
Farmington,  Utah,  Feb.  14,  1890,  as  a 
Patriarch  in  the  Church.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  269.) 

VANCE,  William  Perkins,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Oct.  20,  1822,  in  Jackson  County,  Ten- 
nessee, a  son  of  John  Vance  and  Sarah 
Perkins.  He  was  baptized  in  1842, 
went  to  Nauvoo,  and  lived  for  a  time 
in  the  home  of  the  Prophet  Joseph 
Smith.  After  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  with  the  pioneers,  he  was 
one  of  a  company  which,  under  the  di- 
rection of  Parley  P.  Pratt,  explored 
the  regions  lying  south  of  Salt  Lake 
Valley;  later  he  became  one  of  the 
first  settlers  in  Iron  County.  He  served 
as  the  first  judge  in  Summit  County, 
and  in  1884  moved  to  St.  George.  In 
1902  he  located  at  Lund,  Nevada, 
where  he  died  Dec.  5,  1914,  survived 
by  his  wife,  three  sons  and  three 
daughters. 

WALKER,  Henson,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  March 
13,  1820,  in  Manchester,  Ontario  Co., 
New  York,  a  son  of  Henson  Walker 
and  Matilda  Arnell.  After  his  arrival 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley,  he  became 


Vol.  IV.  No.  46 


November  14,  1936 


722 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


a  pioneer  of  Pleasant  Grove,  Utah  Co., 
Utah,  where  he  presided  as  Bish- 
op for  a  number  of  years  and  also 
served  several  terms  as  mayor  of  that 
city.  He  v^^as  the  father  of  twenty 
children.  Bishop  Walker  died  at 
Pleasant  Grove  Jan.  24,  1904.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  508.) 

WARDLE,  George,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
3,  1820,  in  Chedelton  parish,  Stafford- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  Ralph  Wardle 
and  Ann  Allen.  He  was  baptized  by 
Wm.  Knight  in  1839,  emigrated  to 
America  in  1842,  went  to  Nauvoo  and 
with  the  exiled  saints  from  that  city 
located  at  Winter  Quarters,  where  he 
was  selected  as  one  of  the  pioneer  com- 
pany. He  was  a  talented  musician  and 
became  a  member  of  the  brass  band 
which  played  at  the  laying  of  the  cor- 
nerstones of  the  Salt  Lake  Temple, 
April  6,  1853.  He  located  at  Vernal, 
Uintah  Co.,  where  he  taught  music  and 
assisted  in  protecting  the  settlers 
against  Indian  depredations.  He  was 
chorister  of  the  Vernal  Ward  and  later 
chorister  of  the  Uintah  Stake.  He 
died  at  Vernal  Nov.  25,  1901,  survived 
by  a  large  family. 

WARDSWORTH,  William  Shin,  one 

of  the  original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was 
born  March  5,  1810,  in  Salem  County, 
New  Jersey.  He  was  baptized  by  El- 
der George  Adams  at  Philadelphia, 
Pa.,  in  the  fall  of  1841  and  was  oi-dain- 
ed  a  Seventy  by  Joseph  Young  in  Feb- 
ruary, 1846.  He  was  a  hard-working 
and  intelligent  man,  and  on  the  pioneer 
journey  rendered  signal  service  in 
clearing  the  roads  and  in  building 
bridges.  He  also  assisted  in  explora- 
tion of  the  surrounding  country  after 
his  arrival  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley. 
As  long  as  he  was  able,  he  was  always 
foremost  in  opening  canyons,  making 
roads,  digging  water  ditches,  etc.,  and 
many  of  the  present  residents  of  Utah 
now  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  labors.  Bro. 


Wardsworth  died  at  Springville,  Utah, 
Jan.  18,  1888. 

WEILER,  Jacob,  one  of  the  original 
pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  March  14, 
1809,  near  Churchtown,  Lancaster  Co., 
Pa.  After  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  he  served  as  Bishop  of 
the  3rd  Ward  of  Salt  Lake  City  for 
about  forty  years.  He  died  in  Salt 
Lake  City  March  24,  1896,  as  a  Patri- 
arch in  the  Church  and  survived  by 
several  children.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 

I,  p.  601.) 

WHEELER,  John,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
3,  1802,  in  Kean  County,  South  Caro- 
lina, a  son  of  William  and  Lucy  Wheel- 
er. He  came  to  Great  Salt  Lake  Val- 
ley in  July,  1847,  as  o'e  o£  the 
pioneer  company,  and  later  the  same 
year  returned  to  Winter  Quarters  with 
Pres.  Brigham  Young.  He  came  back 
to  the  Rocky  Mountain  home  of  the 
saints  and  was  in  Great  Salt  Lake  City 
in  March,  1851.  In  1861  he  was  com- 
plimented for  the  fine  stock  exhibited 
by  him  at  the  Fair  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Deseret  Ag- 
ricultural and  Manufacturing  Society. 
Later  he  went  to  California  and  be- 
came lost  to  the  knowledge  of  his  for- 
mer friends. 

WHIPPLE,  Edson,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born  Feb. 
5,  1805,  at  Dummerston,  Vermont,  a 
son  of  Timothy  Whipple  and  Elizabeth 
Safford.  He  was  baptized  by  Benja- 
min Winchester  in  Philadelphia,  Pa., 
June  15,  1840.  He  became  one  of  the 
pioneers  of  Parowan  and  drew  the  plan 
for  that  city,  and  with  another  broth- 
er, erected  the  first  thresher  there.  He 
died  at  Colonia  Juarez,  Mexico,  May 

II,  1894.     (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p. 
560.) 

WHITNEY,  Horace  Kimball,  one  of 

the    original    pioneers    of    Utah,   was 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


723 


born  July  25,  1823,  at  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
a  son  of  Newel  K.  and  Elizabeth  Ann 
Whitney.  His  father,  later  presiding 
Bishop  of  the  Church,  gave  him  the 
best  opportunity  that  the  times  and 
educational  facilities  could  command, 
and  being  very  intelligent,  and  pos- 
sessed of  a  retentive  memory,  the  boy 
acquired  a  taste  for  learning  and  a 
love  of  literature  which  remained  with 
him  all  his  life.  He  was  also  an  expert 
mathematician  and  an  accomplished 
musician — in  a  word,  he  possessed 
gifts  which  in  a  less  diffident  man, 
would  have  brought  him  into  great 
prominence.  He  learned  the  printer's 
trade  in  Nauvoo  and  set  type  for  the 
first  issue  of  the  "Deseret  News,"  June 
15,  1850.  He  performed  military  ser- 
vice with  the  territorial  militia,  was 
a  member  of  the  Deseret  Dramatic  As- 
sociation, treading  with  recognized 
ability  the  boards  of  the  Social  Hall 
and  Salt  Lake  Theater  in  the  early 
sixties,  and  was  for  years  a  member 
of  the  theatre  orchestra.  Bro.  Whitney 
died  Nov.  22,  1884,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  survived  by  his  wives,  Helen 
Mar  Kimball,  and  Mary  Cravath  Whit- 
ney, and  several  children,  among 
whom  was  the  late  Apostle  Orson  F. 
Whitney. 

WHITNEY,   Orson   K.,   one   of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Jan.  30,  1830,  at  Kirtland,  Ohio,  a  son 
of  Newel  K.  and  Elizabeth  Ann  Whit- 
ney. After  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  Bro.  Whitney  took  part 
in  numerous  expeditions  in  connection 
with  Indian  depredations  and  was  a 
daring  and  adventurous  frontiersman. 
He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City  July  31, 
1884. 

WILLIAMS,  Almon  M.,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  arrived  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  with  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  in  July,  1847.  Later 
the  same  year  he  returned  to  Winter 
Quarters  in  William  Clayton's  com- 
pany,   and    in    1848    is    mentioned    as 


one  of  the  signers  of  a  petition  to  the 
U.  S.  government  to  establish  a  post- 
office  on  the  Pottawattamie  lands.  He 
probably  did  not  come  back  to  Utah, 
as  no  further  mention  is  made  in  ref- 
erence to  him. 

WOODRUFF,   Wilford,  one   of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  at  which 
time  he  was  a  member  of  the  Council 
of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  was  born 
March  1,  1807,  in  Farmington,  Hart- 
ford Co.,  Conn.,  a  son  of  Aphek  Wood- 
ruff. After  his  arrival  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley  he  fostered  agriculture 
and  manufactures  and  established  the 
Deseret  Agricultural  and  Manufactur- 
ing Association,  which  held  fairs, 
awarding  prizes  for  superior  merit. 
Bro.  Woodruff  died  as  President  of  the 
Church,  while  visiting  friends  in  San 
Francisco,  California.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  1,  p.  20.) 

WOOLSEY,    Thomas,    one    of    the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Nov.  3,  1805,  in  Pulaski  Co.,  Kentucky, 
a  son  of  Joseph  Woolsey  and  Abigail 
Shiffer.  He  was  baptized  in  1838,  in 
Kentucky,  and  emigrated  to  Nauvoo, 
Illinois.  When  the  saints,  encamped 
on  the  banks  of  the  Missouri  River, 
were  called  upon  to  furnish  500  men 
to  volunteer  to  go  into  military  service 
and  march  to  California,  he  was  one 
who  responded  to  the  call,  leaving  his 
wife  and  family  at  Mount  Pisgah.  He 
went  with  the  company  as  far  as  Fort 
Leavenworth  and  being  appointed  with 
John  H.  Tippetts  to  carry  money  col- 
lected from  the  Mormon  Battalion  for 
the  benefit  of  the  exiled  saints  on  the 
Missouri  River,  he  went  back  to  Win- 
ter Quarters  and  in  the  spring  of  the 
following  year  was  selected  as  one  of 
the  pioneer  company.  After  remain- 
ing a  short  time  in  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
he  returned  to  Winter  Quarters  with 
Pres.  Brigham  Young.  He  was  ap- 
pointed to  assist  in  caring  for  the 
saints  at  Winter  Quarters  and  did  not 
come  back  to  Utah  until  1852.    He  took 


724 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


part  cheerfully  in  the  labors  of  the 
pioneers  to  establish  settlements  and 
died  at  Wales,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  Jan. 
5,  1897.  He  was  the  father  of  27  chil- 
dren, 

WOODWARD,   George,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Sept.  9,  1817,  in  Monmouth  County, 
New  Jersey.  He  was  with  the  wagons 
that  made  the  first  start  from  Winter 
Quarters  for  the  Rocky  Mountains  on 
April  5,  1847.  Returning  to  Winter 
Quarters  for  conference  he  joined  the 
camp  at  the  Elkhoin  River  again  on 
April  7,  1847.  He  describes  the  ar- 
tillery of  the  camp  as  consisting  of  one 
cannon,  rigged  up  like  a  wagon,  with 
a  span  of  horses  and  a  gi-ain  box.  He 
was  one  of  the  pioneers  of  southern 
Utah  and  became  a  prominent  citizen 
of  St.  George,  Washington  Co.,  where 
he  died  Dec.  17,  1903. 

YOUNG,  Brigham,  the  great  pio- 
neer and  leader  of  the  original  com- 
pany of  Utah  pioneers,  was  born  June 
1,  1801,  at  Whitingham,  Windham  Co., 
Vermont,  a  son  of  John  Young  and  A. 
Nabie  Howe.  He  was  baptized  and 
confirmed  a  member  of  the  Church 
April  14,  1832,  and  from  that  time  be- 
came an  earnest  worker  and  one  of 
the  veritable  pillars  of  the  Church. 
As  president  of  the  Quorum  of  the 
Twelve  Apostles  he  became  the  nom- 
inal president  of  the  Church  immedi- 
ately after  the  martyrdom  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  his  broth- 
er Hyrum.  With  characteristic  lead- 
ership he  led  the  first  company  of  pio- 
neers across  the  plains  and  mountains 
to  their  selected  refuge  in  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  was  sustained  as  president 
of  the  Church  in  the  fall  of  1847,  serv- 
ed as  governor  of  the  Provisional  State 
of  Deseret  and  of  the  Territory  of 
Utah,  and  under  his  guidance  nearly 
300  towns  and  settlements  were  found- 
ed during  the  thirty  years  which  in- 
tervened between  his  arrival  in  Great 
Salt   Lake    Valley    and    his    death    in 


Salt  Lake  City  Aug.  29,  1877.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  8.) 

YOUNG,  Clarissa  Decker,  one  of  the 

three  original  pioneer  women  of  Utah, 
and  a  wife  of  Pres.  Brigham  Young, 
was  born  July  22,  1828,  in  Freedom, 
Cattaraugus  Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  daughter  of 
Isaac  Decker  and  Harriet  Page  Wheel- 
er. After  her  arrival  in  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  she  remained  with  the 
saints  while  her  husband  returned  to 
Winter  Quarters,  and  was  an  example 
of  patience  and  industry  to  the  pioneer 
women  who  followed  closely  after  the 
original  company  of  pioneers.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  804.) 

YOUNG,  Harriet  Page  Wheeler,  one 

of  the  three  original  pioneer  women 
of  Utah,  and  a  wife  of  Lorenzo  D. 
Young,  was  born  Sept.  7,  1803,  at 
Hillsboro,  New  Hampshire,  a  daughter 
of  Oliver  Wheeler  and  Hannah  Ashley. 
While  on  the  pioneer  journey,  she  was 
accompanied  by  two  children,  her  own 
little  boy,  Isaac  Perry  Decker  (son  of 
her  first  husband,  Isaac  Decker)  and 
Lorenzo  Sobieski  Young  (Bx'o.  Loren- 
zo D.  Young's  son  by  a  former  wife, 
Clara  Decker  Young).  She  was  also 
the  mother  of  Clara,  Pres.  Brigham 
Young's  wife.  Sister  Young  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Dec.  22,  1871. 

YOUNG,  Lorenzo  Dow,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Oct.  19,  1807,  at  Smyrna,  Chenango 
Co.,  New  York,  a  son  of  John  Young 
and  Nabie  Howe.  He  was  a  brother  of 
Pres.  Brigham  Young.  As  a  child  he 
was  very  weakly,  but  was  put  to  work 
with  a  gardener  and  nursery  man. 
This  labor,  although  somewhat  stren- 
uous, improved  his  health  and  was  also 
of  great  advantage  to  the  Utah  pio- 
neers as  he  was  the  first  to  cultivate 
garden  flowers  in  Salt  Lake  Valley, 
and  was  successful  in  raising  fine  veg- 
etables. On  the  pioneer  journey  he 
brought  with  him  a  cow,  one  of  the 
very  few  cows  brought  to  Salt  Lake 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


725 


Valley  in  1847.  For  a  time  he  and 
his  family  lived  in  the  Old  Fort,  but 
finally,  receiving  permission  from  Pres. 
Brigham  Young,  he  erected  a  house 
close  to  the  present  site  of  the  Eagle 
Gate.  He  was  Bishop  of  the  18th 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  from  1851  to 
1878,  and  died  in  Salt  Lake  City  Nov. 
21,  1895. 

YOUNG,  Lorenzo  Zobieski,  (also 
spelled  Sobieski),  one  of  the  two  chil- 
dren in  the  original  pioneer  com- 
pany (a  child  of  six  years  of  age 
at  the  time),  was  born  March  9,  1841, 
in  Winchester,  Morgan  Co.,  Illinois,  a 
son  of  Lorenzo  D.  Young  and  Persis 
Goodall.  With  his  father  and  his  wife 
Clara  Decker  Young,  the  boy  came 
to  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  July, 
1847.  His  second  name,  Zobieski,  was 
traced  back  to  John  III,  king  of  Po- 
land, after  whom  he  was  named.  Like 
his  father,  Lorenzo  D.  Young,  Zobies- 
ki, as  he  was  generally  called,  loved 
horticulture,  and  at  85  years  of  age, 
expressed  his  joy  that  winter  would 
soon  be  gone  and  he  could  again  work 
in  his  garden.  He  died  March  28, 
1904,  at  Shelley,  Idaho,  survived  by 
several  children. 

YOUNG,  Phinehas  Howe,  one  of  the 

original  pioneers  of  Utah,  was  born 
Feb.  16,  1799,  in  Hopkinton,  Middlesex 
Co.,  Mass.,  a  son  of  John  Young  and 
Nabie  Howe,  and  a  brother  of  Pres. 
Brigham  Young.  After  coming  to 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  with  the  pio- 
neers he  took  an  active  part  in  devel- 
oping the  resources  of  the  counti-y  and 
worked  as  a  printer.  Later  he  worked 
as  a  saddler  and  still  later  as  a  con- 
tractor. He  filled  missions  to  Canada 
and  to  England  and  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Oct.  10,  1879,  survived  by  a  large 
family. 


OLD  FOLKS 
CENTRAL  COMMITTEE 

ARMSTRONG,  William  W.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Commit- 


tee from  1927  to  1930 +  ,  was  born 
Sept.  18,  1865,  in  Darlington,  Wiscon- 
sin, a  son  of  William  H.  Armstrong 
and  Georgia  Wright.  He  died  Oct.  23, 
1932,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  Mr. 
Armstrong  was  a  successful  banker 
and  in  full  sympathy  with  the  policy 
of  honoring  the  Old  Folks. 

AUERBACH,  Herbert  F.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Commit- 
tee since  1927,  was  born  Oct.  4,  1882, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Samuel  H.  Auerbach  and  Eveline 
Brooks.  He  is  one  of  the  most  promi- 
nent men  in  Utah  in  civic  and  business 
affairs,  and  in  favor  of  any  movement 
inaugurated  toward  making  life  happy 
for  the  Old  Folks. 

BARTON,  William  B.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee  from 
1903  to  1923,  was  born  July  21,  1836, 
at  Sutton  Mill,  on  the  Douglas  river, 
near  Wigan,  Lancashire,  England,  a 
son  of  John  Barton  and  Elizabeth  Bell. 
He  died  Oct.  1,  1923,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  667.) 

BEAN,  Joshua  B.,  a  member  of  the 
Old  Folks  Central  Committee,  from 
1908  to  1935,  and  secretary  from  1915 
to  1935,  was  born  Oct.  9,  1858,  in  Cin- 
cinnati, Ohio,  a  son  of  Joseph  Bean 
and  Sarah  Beanland.  He  died  Feb.  4, 
1935,  in  Los  Angeles,  California. 

BINDER,  William  Lawrence  Spicer, 

a  member  of  the  Old  Folks  Central 
Committee  from  1879  to  1902,  was  bom 
July  10,  1832,  in  London,  England,  a 
son  of  John  Binder  and  Mary  Spicer. 
He  died  July  21,  1910,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  640.) 

BOURNE,  George  T.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee  since 
1903,  was  born  Sept.  1,  1857,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  George  E. 
Bourne  and  Mary  Ann  Taysum. 

BURBIDGE,  George  E.,  a  member 
of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee 
in  1921,  was  born  Dec.  1,  1868,  in  Salt 


726 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  and 
Sarah  Jane  Burbidge.  He  died  Oct. 
17,  1921,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

BURTON,  Willard  C,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee  since 
1928,  was  born  Dec.  1,  1856,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Robert  T. 
Burton  and  Susan  E.  McBride. 

CANNON,  Sylvester  Q.,  chairman 
of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee 
since  1925,  was  born  June  10,  1877, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
George  Q.  Cannon  and  Elizabeth  Hoag- 
land.    (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  351.) 

DAYNES,  Joseph  J.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee  from 
1921  to  1934,  was  born  Nov.  7,  1873, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jos- 
eph J.  Daynes  and  Mary  Jane  Sharp. 
(See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  477.) 

EDDINGTON,  William,  a  member 
of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee 
from  1879  to  1913,  was  born  Nov.  27, 
1821,  in  Portsea,  Portsmouth,  Hamp- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  James  Edding- 
ton  and  Eliza  Seaton.  He  died  March 
3,  1913.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  620.) 

EMPEY,  Nelson  A.,  a  member  of  the 
Old  Folks  Central  Committee  from 
1885  to  1904,  was  born  May  7,  1837, 
in  Preston,  Ontario,  Canada,  a  son  of 
William  Empey  and  Mary  Ann  Mor- 
gan. He  died  Sept.  4,  1904,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah. 

FETZER,  John  Casper,  a  member 
of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee 
from  1921  to  1926,  was  born  Sept.  24, 
1879,  in  Langenfeld,  Bavaria,  Ger- 
many, a  son  of  Peter  Fetzer  and  Anna 
Seifert.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  4,  p.  93.) 

FINCH,  Harry  L.,  a  member  of  the 
Old  Folks  Central  Committee,  in 
1930 +  ,  was  born  Dec.  13,  1875,  in 
Chautauqua  County,  Kansas,  a  son  of 
Lyman  M.  Finch  and  Nancy  Ellen 
Study. 

GODDARD,  George,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal organizers  of  the  Old  Folks  Cen- 


tral Committee  serving  from  1875  to 
1899,  was  born  Dec.  5,  1815,  in  Leices- 
ter, England,  a  son  of  Cornelius  and 
Mary  Goddard.  He  died  Jan.  12,  1899, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.   1,  p.   706.) 

GODDARD,  Heber  S.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee 
from  1901  to  1914,  was  born  Sept. 
25,  1863,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a 
son  of  George  Goddard  and  Mary  Sut- 
ton. He  died  Dec.  15,  1904,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah. 

GRANT,     Brigham     Frederick,     a 

member  of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Com- 
mittee from  1906  to  1936,  was  born 
Oct.  17,  1856,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
a  son  of  Jedediah  M.  Grant  and  Mary- 
etta  Kesler.  He  died  Aug.  30,  1936,  in 
Los  Angeles,  California. 

GROESBECK,     Hyrum     Smith,     a 

member  of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Com- 
mittee from  1903  to  1915,  and  vice 
chairman  for  two  years,  was  born  July 
19,  1854,  in  Springfield,  Illinois,  a  son 
of  Nicholas  Groesbeck  and  Elizabeth 
Thompson.  He  died  March  23,  1915, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

• 
HILLAM,  Rodney,  jun.,  a  member 

of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee 

since  1924,  was  born  June  23,  1870,  in 

Brigham   City,   Box   Elder  Co.,  Utah, 

a   son   of   Rodney   Hillam  and   Mary 

Ann  Grimsdall. 

HUNTER,  Edward,  one  of  the  orig- 
inal members  and  chairman  of  the  Old 
Folks  Central  Committee  from  1875 
to  1883,  was  born  June  22,  1793,  in 
Newton  township,  Delaware  Co.,  Penn- 
sylvania, a  son  of  Edward  and  Sarah 
Hunter.  He  died  Oct.  16,  1883,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol. 
1,  p.  227.) 

HUNTER,  Oscar  F.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee, 
from  1913  to  1931,  was  born  May  8, 
1852,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son 
of  Bishop  Edward  Hunter  and  Laura 
Shimer   Kaufman.    He  died  Aug.   24, 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


727 


1931,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.    (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  643.) 

IVERSON,  Heber  C,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee 
since  1908,  was  born  July  1,  1868, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Sor- 
en  Iversen  and  Caroline  Monsen. 

JENSON,  Andrew,  a  member  of  the 
Old  Folks  Central  Committee  since 
1883,  secretary  from  1883  to  1915,  and 
vice  chairman  since  1915,  was  born 
Dec.  11,  1850,  in  Torslev  parish,  Hjor- 
ring  amt,  Denmark,  a  son  of  Christian 
Jensen  and  Kirsten  Andersen.  (See 
Bio  Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  261.) 

KIRKMAN,  John,  a  member  of  the 
Old  Folks  Central  Committee  from 
1879  to  1910,  was  born  Nov.  1,  1830, 
in  Manchester,  Lancashire,  England, 
a  son  of  Henry  Kirkman  and  Sarah 
Holmes.  He  died  Nov.  15,  1910,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah. 

MARGETTS,  George  B.,  a  member 
of  the  Od  Folks  Central  Committee 
since  1903,  was  born  June  16,  1859, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Phil- 
ip Margetts   and   Elizabeth   Bateman. 

MIDDLETON,  George  W.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Old  Folks  Central  Commit- 
tee since  1934,  was  born  Dec.  10,  1866, 
in  Hamilton's  Fort,  Iron  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  John  Middleton  and  Jane  With- 
ers. 

.  MORRIS,  Nephi  L.,  a  member  of  the 
Old  Folks  Central  Committee  since 
1921,  was  born  Oct.  2,  1870,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Elias  Mor- 
ris and  Mary  L.  Walker.  (See  Bio. 
Ency.,  Vol.  1,  p.  639.) 

MORRIS,  Richard  P.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee  from 
1924  to  1925,  was  born  Dec.  23,  1855, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Richard  V.  Morris  and  Hannah  Phil- 
lips. He  died  April  2,  1925,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah. 


NAYLOR,  William,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee  from 
1879  to  1918,  was  born  Aug.  19,  1835, 
in  Little  Budworth,  Cheshire,  England, 
a  son  of  George  Naylor  and  Mary  Sef- 
ton.  He  came  to  Utah  in  1848,  and 
died  Feb.  22,  1918,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah. 

NIBLEY,  Charles  W.,  a  member  and 
chairman  of  the  Old  Folks  Central 
Committee  from  1908  to  1925,  was 
born  Feb.  5,  1849,  in  Hunterfield,  near 
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  a  son  of  James 
Nibley  and  Jean  Wilson.  He  died  Dec. 
11,  1925,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3,  p.  766.) 

PRESTON,  William  B.,  a  member 
and  chairman  of  the  Old  Folks  Cen- 
tral Committee,  from  1884  to  1907, 
was  born  Nov.  24,  1830,  in  Franklin 
County,  Virginia,  a  son  of  Christopher 
Preston  and  Martha  Mitchell  Claytor. 
He  died  Aug.  12,  1908,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  1, 
p.  232.) 

SAVAGE,   Charles   Roscoe,   one   of 

the  members  of  the  Old  Folks  Central 
Committee  from  1875  to  1909,  was 
born  Aug.  16,  1832,  in  Southampton, 
England,  a  son  of  John  and  Ann  Sav- 
age. He  died  Feb.  3,  1909,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah.  He  is  recognized  as  the 
father  of  the  Old  Folks  movement  and 
a  statue  was  erected  in  his  honor  at 
the  southeast  corner  of  the  lemple 
Block  in  July,  1936.  (See  Bio.  Ency., 
Vol.  3,  p.  708.) 

SAVAGE,  George  L.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee,  from 
1909  to  1936,  was  born  Jan.  27,  1865, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Charles  R.  Savage  and  Annie  Adkins. 
He  died  March  8,  1936,  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  Utah. 

TAYLOR,  Stanley  F.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee  from 
1925    to     1931,    was    born    Dec.    29, 


728 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


1866,  in  Moroni,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  Stanley  Taylor  and  Hannah 
Howard.  He  died  Feb.  20,  1931,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah. 

WILLIAMS,  John  T.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee  since 
1924,  was  born  Jan.  21,  1862,  in  Crad- 


ley,  Herefordshire,  England,  a  son  of 
John  Williams  and  Ann  Pugh. 

YOUNG,  Brigham  S.,  a  member  of 
the  Old  Folks  Central  Committee  from 
1896  to  1901,  was  born  Dec,  29,  1857, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Brigham  Young,  jun.,  and  Catherine 
C.  Spencer. 


-«C<»g^|POI»- 


MISCELLANEOUS   BIOGRAPHIES 


ADAMS,  Orson  B.,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  C,  was 
born  March  9,  1815,  in  New  York  State, 
and  came  to  Utah  the  year  following 
the  march  of  the  Battalion  to  Califor- 
nia. In  1850  he  went  to  Parowan  as  a 
pioneer,  and  later  extended  his  pioneer 
work  to  Washington  County,  Utah, 
settling  at  Harrisburg.  He  died  Feb. 
4,  1901.  His  companion  in  the  Battal- 
ion, John  Steele,  spoke  at  the  services, 
and  told  of  the  fine  character  of  Broth- 
er Adams;  said  he  was  a  most  diligent 
and  straightforward  man.  Brother 
Adams  acted  as  Bishop  of  the  Harris- 
burg Ward  in  1878. 

ALLEN,  Ezra  H.,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  marched  as  a  pri- 
vate in  Company  C  to  California,  and 
after  his  discharge  went  up  the  Pacific 
coast  as  far  as  the  Sacramento  River. 
There  he  was  employed  until  June, 
1848,  when  he  started  for  Great  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  together  wth  others  who, 
like  himself,  had  been  members  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion.  On  the  jour- 
ney eastward  he  was  killed  by  Indians 
in  the  Sierra  Nevada  Mountains,  and 
a  few  days  later  his  body  was  found 
by  friends.  His  son,  Andrew  A.  Allen, 
acted  for  a  number  of  years  as  Bish- 
op of  Weston,  Idaho. 

ALLRED,    James   Tilman    Sanford, 

a  member  of  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
Company  A,  was  born  March  28, 
1825,  in  Bedford  County,  Tennessee,  a 
son  of  James  and  Elizabeth  Allred. 
He  was  baptized  in  February,  1835,  in 


Clay  County,  Missouri,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty in  Nauvoo  in  1842,  and  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Reuben  W.  Allred 
in  Nauvoo.  He  marched  with  the  Bat- 
talion to  California  and  came  to  Utah 
in  an  early  day.  He  was  sent  to  Las 
Vegas,  New  Mexico,  on  an  Indian  Mis- 
sion, and  baptized  many  Indians.  In 
February,  1856,  he  was  set  apart  as 
first  counselor  to  Bishop  John  D.  Chase 
at  Ephraim,  Utah,  and  on  April  17, 
1859,  was  set  apart  as  second  counselor 
to  Bishop  Caleb  Edwards  of  Ephraim. 
He  died  May  29,  1905,  in  Spring  City, 
Utah. 

ANDERSON,  Hakon  Walter,  an  El- 
der who  died  while  filling  a  mission, 
was  born  May  31,  1898,  in  Pima,  Gra- 
ham Co.,  Arizona,  a  son  of  Hakon  J. 
Anderson  and  Sarah  E.  Anderson.  He 
was  baptized  June  1,  1906,  by  Ray  M. 
Hanchett,  and  later  ordained  an  Elder. 
While  still  a  resident  of  Pima,  Graham 
Co.,  Arizona,  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States.  He  ac- 
cepted the  call  and  was  set  apart  July 
9,  1918.  A  short  time  after  arriving 
in  his  field  of  labor  he  was  stricken 
with  pneumonia  following  an  attack 
of  influenza,  from  which  he  died  Oct. 
31,  1918,  in  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin. 
From  the  time  he  arrived  in  the  field, 
he  magnified  his  calling  to  the  entire 
satisfaction  of  those  placed  over  him, 
rendering  able  and  valiant  service  in 
the  cause  of  the  Master.  He  was  an 
inspiration  to  all  who  knew  him,  and 
was  loved  and  respected  for  his  agree- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


729 


able  disposition,  his  clean  and  sincere 
manhood,  and  his  love  for  right  and 
righteousness  of  life.  His  sister  Nora, 
also  a  missionary  of  exceptional  abil- 
ity, was  at  his  bedside  at  the  time  of 
his  death,  and  accompanied  the  body 
of  her  brother  to  their  home  in  the 
West. 

AVERETT,  Jeduthan,  a  member 'of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  D, 
was  born  June  12,  1816,  in  Chesterfield 
County,  North  Carolina.  He  was  bap- 
tized about  the  year  1833  in  Alabama 
by  James  Bro\vn  and  emigrated  to  Nau- 
voo.  111.,  after  the  death  of  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith,  having  presided  over  a 
branch  of  the  Church  in  Alabama  for 
several  years.  Traveling  westward  in 
1846,  he  enlisted  in  the  Battalion  on  the 
Missouri  River,  suffered  considerably 
with  sickness  on  the  journey,  but  was 
healed  from  being  in  an  insensible  con- 
dition when  about  four  hundred  miles 
on  the  way.  He  wintered  in  Pueblo, 
and  arrived  in  the  Salt  Lake  Valley  in 
July,  1847.  He  afterwards  went  back 
to  the  States,  resided  five  years  in 
Kanesville,  Iowa,  and  returned  to  the 
Valley  in  1852.  He  worked  for  Pres. 
Brigham  Young  for  six  years  and  then 
moved  to  Springville  in  December, 
1857.  Bro.  Averett  was  always  known 
as  a  quiet  but  busy  man.  He  died  in 
St.  George,  Utah,  Jan.  12,  1885. 

BARNEY,  Walter,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  C,  was 
born  Jan.  7,  1819,  in  Ohio,  a  son  of 
Charles  Barney  and  Mercy  Yoeman. 
He  arrived  in  Utah  in  1847.  Later  he 
was  a  pioneer  of  Sanpete  and  Sevier 
counties,  Utah,  and  an  Indian  war  vet- 
eran. He  died  April  15,  1917,  at  Mon- 
roe, Sevier  Co.,  Utah. 

BARRON,  Alexander   Franklin, 

(1813-1885),  of  Scotch-Irish  descent, 
and  a  descendant  of  a  long  line  of 
early  American  pioneers,  was  born 
Oct.  4,  1813,  at  Elkridge,  Giles  Co., 
Tenn.,  a  son  of  Alexander  Barron  and 


Elizabeth  Liddell.  Until  he  was  nine- 
teen years  of  age  he  lived  in  Tennes- 
see and  Georgia  with  his  parents.  He 
was  educated  in  home  schools,  and  in 


.  ,^_^, . 

'   ,  :   . 

P'^lwfe' 

Wm 

■  ;  :^/;  ■.■':,  1 

"'^ 

:'-■  ■■  -jai 

^     J 

KW^'ijp;^ 

B'm 

si  J 

'•^ 

ff 

'-w^ 

mm^gmmmBmsi' 

11 

Nashville,  Tenn.,  where  he  studied 
medicine  for  a  time.  In  1832  he  joined 
a  party  of  U.  S.  surveyors,  and  with 
them  and  a  company  of  U.  S.  colonists, 
went  to  Texas.  Here  he  associated 
with  such  men  as  David  Crockett  and 
Samuel  Houston  in  the  development 
and  pioneering  of  the  country,  he  hav- 
ing extensive  land  grants  in  and  near 
Houston,  where  he  made  his  home.  In 
1844  he  married  Dovey  Ann  Shinn.  She 
died  in  1847,  leaving  two  small  daugh- 
ters. In  1848  he  married  Mary  Miller, 
and  with  her  he  was  baptized  into  the 
L.  D.  S.  Church  Aug.  6,  1851,  by  Wil- 
liam Moody.  By  this  marriage  eleven 
children  were  born;  six  sons  and  five 
daughters.  In  September,  1853,  he 
started  for  Utah  with  the  Preston 
Thomas  Company,  which  was  said  to 
be  one  of  the  largest  companies  to 
leave  for  Utah  at  one  time.  There 
were  102  wagons,  one  thousand  head 
of  cattle,  and  a  large  number  of  fine 
horses,  mules,  and  sheep.  They  arrived 
at  the  Cherokee  Strip,  or  Nation,  Nov. 
4,  1853,  and  stayed  there  for  the  win- 


730 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ter.  In  the  spring  of  1854  they  started 
for  Utah  again,  with  Washington  Jolly 
as  captain,  the  company  now  being 
divided.  Arriving  in  Utah  in  Septem- 
ber, they  stayed  in  Salt  Lake  City  just 
one  day  when  Pres.  Brigham  Young 
sent  them  to  Fort  Herriman  to  make 
their  home.  Bro.  Barron  took  the  cat- 
tle to  Cache  Valley  later,  because  there 
was  more  feed  there.  Due  to  extreme 
cold  and  heavy  snows  about  half  of  the 
herds  was  lost.  He  returned  to  Herri- 
man  to  find  the  family  needing  help, 
as  his  wife  was  ill  and  the  hired  man 
had  gone  insane.  He  lived  at  Fort 
Herriman  for  about  ten  years  and  was 
Bishop  there  from  1858  to  1865,  being 
the  first  Bishop  of  the  Fort  Herriman 
Ward.  In  1857  he  married  Phoebe  Ann 
Peck  as  a  plural  wife.  She  bore  him 
three  children,  namely,  two  boys  and 
one  daughter.  His  children  (sixteen  in 
all)  except  three  grew  to  maturity 
and  became  good  citizens  in  the  com- 
munity where  they  have  lived.  In  1858 
Bro.  Ban-on  went  south  in  the  "Gen- 
eral Move",  and  spent  a  year 
at  Fillmore  and  Meadow  Creek. 
He  did  quite  an  extensive  dairy  busi- 
ness, selling  to  passing  travelers,  not- 
ably the  company  of  Mountain  Meadow 
Massacre  fame.  They  bought  freely 
and  paid  liberally  for  butter,  cheese 
and  milk.  While  there  he  was  called 
by  Anson  Call  to  go  with  Jacob  Croft 
and  William  Powell  to  survey  a  town- 
site  in  Millard  County.  They  located 
the  site  for  Deseret  and  dedicated  the 
land.  Bro.  Barron  offered  the  dedica- 
tory prayer,  in  which  he  prophesied, 
that  the  desert  in  Pahvant  Valley 
would  truly  blossom  as  a  rose,  and  that 
a  highway  would  be  "thrown  up" 
through  the  valley,  which  would  con- 
nect the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific 
oceans.  Streams  of  living  water  would 
flow  out  of  the  ground,  and  the  valley 
would  be  settled  from  the  mountains 
East  toward  the  West,  North  and 
South  and  in  time  become  a  great  agri- 
cultural center.  In  1922  President 
Alonzo  A.   Hinckley,  while  acting  as 


Commissioner  of  Agriculture  in  Utah, 
stated  that  Millard  County  had  pro- 
duced more  hay  and  grain  and  alfalfa 
seed  in  1922  than  any  other  locality  in 
Utah,  thus  verifying  the  prophecy  of 
Brother  Barron.  After  spending  a 
year  in  Millard  County,  Bro.  Barron 
returned  to  Fort  Herriman,  but  in  1865 
President  Young  called  him  to  go  to 
the  "Muddy"  in  southern  Nevada.  He 
arrived  in  St.  George  late  in  November, 
where  Erastus  Snow  advised  him  to  go 
to  Panaca,  Nevada,  instead  of  the 
Muddy,  as  the  ranges  were  dead  from 
lack  of  rain.  At  Panaca  he  served  as 
acting  Bishop  and  while  living  here 
he  filled  a  short  mission  to  his  old 
home  in  the  South  in  1869.  He 
visited  all  of  his  relatives  in  Tennessee, 
Georgia  and  Alabama,  and  preached 
the  Gospel  to  them.  He  became  a 
prominent  farmer,  stock-raiser,  and 
leader  in  Church  and  civic  affairs  at 
Panaca,  where  he  lived  until  1877, 
when  he  was  again  called  by  Pres. 
Young  to  go  to  St.  George.  He  settled 
at  Washington,  Washington  County, 
making  this  his  headquarters  for  oper- 
ations on  the  Church  ranch  in  north- 
ern Arizona.  In  connection  with  his 
two  sons-in-law,  Virgil  Kelly  and  John 
Lufkin,  he  developed  the  springs  now 
known  as  Sevet,  Oak  Grove  and  Para- 
shont,  which  he  bought  from  the  In- 
dians. This  ranch  was  located  on  the 
north  rim  of  the  Colorado  River,  about 
fifty  miles  west  from  what  is  now  the 
Grand  Canyon  of  Colorado  National 
Park.  At  the  time  Bro.  Barron  was 
managing  this  ranch,  he  had  also  con- 
tracted the  handling  of  the  Church 
sheep  numbering  several  thousand 
head.  Under  the  terms  of  this  contract 
he  was  to  deliver  the  sheep  at  a  certain 
time,  back  to  the  Church  authorities, 
who  had  the  matter  in  charge.  He 
served  notice  that  he  was  ready  to 
make  the  delivery  of  the  sheep  at  a 
definite  locality  at  a  certain  time.  The 
representative  of  the  Church  failed  to 
meet  the  appointment  as  agi*eed,  and 
consequently  the  sheep  had  to  be  held. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


731 


In  the  meantime  an  unusual  snow 
storm  came  upon  them,  and  the  entire 
herd  perished.  The  representative  of 
the  Church  demanded  that  he  make 
payment  in  full  for  the  loss.  The  case 
was  tried  and  a  decision,  which  was 
influenced  by  misrepresentations  and 
prejudice,  was  reached,  sustaining  the 
claim  of  the  Church  representative. 
Bro.  Barron  was  required  to  make  pay- 
ment in  full  for  the  loss,  or  he  would 
be  excommunicated  from  the  Church. 
When  advised  of  the  decision,  he  made 
the  following  statement:  "I  will  not 
allow  myself  to  be  cut  off  the  Church 
for  money,  if  it  takes  all  the  property 
I  have".  In  his  effort  to  pay  this 
enormous  debt,  he  turned  over  his  en- 
tire possessions.  In  the  course  of 
events,  the  matter  was  referred  to 
Apostle  Erastus  Snow,  who,  after  a 
thorough  investigation,  made  the  fol- 
lowing statement:  "Knowing  Elder 
Barron  as  I  do  to  be  an  honest  and  up- 
right man,  I  cannot  believe  him  wil- 
fully guilty,  and  those  men  who  have 
sought  to  demand  from  him  that  which 
is  not  right  will  not  prosper."  This 
statement  has  been  verified,  for  those 
who  instigated  the  proceedings  have 
gone  down  in  disgrace,  thus  fully  vin- 
dicating the  honor  of  Elder  Barron, 
who  was  a  man  of  great  faith  and  al- 
ways loyal  to  the  Church. 

Through  all  the  trials  and  hardships 
of  pioneer  life,  Bro.  Barron  remained 
true  to  the  faith  he  had  espoused,  dy- 
ing as  a  firm  believer  in  the  Latter- 
day  Saint  doctrines  as  taught  by  Jos- 
eph Smith.  It  was  said  of  him  and  his 
families  that  their  charities  knew  no 
bounds.  The  poor  and  needy  never  left 
his  door  unaided,  and  this  fine  humane 
characteristic  was  extended  to  the  In- 
dians as  well  as  the  whites. 

Alexander  F.  Barron  died  in  Wash- 
ington, Utah,  April  3,  1885,  having 
spent  the  last  years  of  his  life  sur- 
rounded by  his  large  family. 

BARRUS,  Orlando  Clark,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  mission,  was 


born  Aug.  18,  1901,  in  Fairview,  Lin- 
coln Co.,  Wyoming,  a  son  of  Orlando 
B.  Barrus  and  Mary  E.  Clark.  He  was 
baptized  Aug.  18,  1909,  by  his  father, 
and  later  ordained  an  Elder.  While 
still  living  at  Fairview  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
being  set  apart  Nov.  16,  1920.  He  had 
labored  in  South  Carolina  twenty-one 
months  when  he  was  accidentally 
drowned  in  the  Chauga  River,  near 
Westminister,  South  Carolina,  Aug.  8, 
1922.  Had  he  lived  ten  days  longer, 
he  would  have  been  twenty-one  years 
of  age.  While  bathing  with  mission- 
ary companions  and  others.  Elder  Bar- 
rus, as  well  as  two  other  bathers, 
walked  unexpectedly  into  deep  water. 
Elder  Barrus  rescued  one  of  the  bath- 
ers, but  in  doing  so  he  became  ex- 
hausted to  the  extent  that  he  could 
not  regain  the  shoi'e.  Due  to  the  ex- 
citement of  the  moment,  and  because 
of  his  being  regarded  as  a  good  swim- 
mer. Elder  Barrus  was  not  considered 
in  danger  until  it  was  too  late.  Me- 
morial services  were  held  in  the  Atlan- 
ta chapel  Aug.  10,  1922.  Pres.  Noal 
H.  Dastrup  of  the  Georgia  conference 
and  Elder  M.  L.  Olsen  of  the  South 
Carolina  conference  accompanied  the 
body  home.  His  missionary  labors 
were  blessed  of  the  Lord  and  his  death 
was  lamented  and  mourned  by  all  the 
missionaries  and  the  people  whose 
hearts  and  souls  he  gladdened  and 
blessed  with  his  presence  and  teach- 
ings. Twelve  years  before  Elder  Bar- 
rus went  into  this  field  his  father  and 
mother  had  performed  missions  in 
South  Carolina. 

BENNION,  Harden  (continued  from 
page  13).  Mrs.  Vilate  Nebeker  Bennion 
died  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  Aug.  21, 
1934,  For  several  years  she  had  pre- 
sided over  the  Relief  Society  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  and  had  held  other 
positions  of  trust  and  responsibility. 
Elder  Harden  Bennion  did  not  long  sur- 
vive his  wife,  but  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City  Oct.  12,  1*36,  as  the  result  of  frac- 


732 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


tures  received  in  a  fall  a  few  days  pre- 
viously. He  was  survived  by  three 
daughters,  Aurelia,  Florence  and  Ber- 
nice  Bennion. 

BENNION,  Samuel  Otis,  one  of  the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies, 
was  born  June  9,  1874,  at  Taylorsville, 
Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  John  R. 
Bennion  and  Emma  Jane  Terry.     He 


was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old  and  was  later  ordained  a  Deacon 
and  presided  over  the  quorum  of  Dea- 
cons of  which  he  was  a  member.  In 
due  course  of  time  he  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  later  a  Seventy.  In  1898 
(Aug.  25th)  he  married  Charlotte  Tow- 
ler  of  Mill  Creek  Ward,  Salt  Lake  Co., 
Utah.  He  received  a  good  education 
in  his  younger  days,  and  during  part  of 
his  life,  before  he  went  into  the  mis- 
sion field,  he  was  occupied  in  agricul- 
ture, but  principally  in  ranching  and 
sheep  raising.  He  was  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  the  Central  States  Nov. 
12,  1904,  and  was  chosen  as  president 
of  the  South  Texas  District  after  he 
had  been  in  the  mission  six  months. 
Later  the  same  year,  he  was  called  to 


the  mission  headquarters  at  Independ- 
ence, Missouri,  and  after  spending  ten 
months  as   secretary   of  the  mission, 
he   was   appointed    mission   president 
Oct.  1,  1906.     The  growth  of  the  mis- 
sion  was    sure    and    steady,   and   the 
sound  practice  established  in  laying  a 
firm  foundation,  made  the  mission,  un- 
der the  direction  of  the  Lord,  an  im- 
portant part  of  the  Church.     In  Jan- 
uary,   1931,    the    Texas    Mission   was 
formed  out  of  the  states  of  Texas  and 
Louisiana,    which    had    constituted    a 
part   of   the   Central   States    Mission. 
Pres.  Bennion  remained  in  the  mission 
field  until  Jan.  20,  1934.    At  the  April 
Conference  in  1933  he  was  sustained 
as  one  of  the  First  Council  of  Seven- 
ties, and  was  ordained  to  that  office 
April  13, 1933,  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant. 
On  April  1,  1934,  Elder  Bennion  was 
appointed  general  manager  and  vice- 
president    of    the     "Deseret     News", 
which  position  he  still  holds.     While 
Pres.  Bennion  had  charge  of  the  Cen- 
tral States  Mission  he  made  it  a  rule 
to  visit  the  missionaries  from  one  end 
of  the  mission  to  the  other  every  nine- 
ty days,  and  saw  them  in  their  fields 
of    labor,    heard    their    reports,    gave 
them  instructions,  and  as  a  result  saw 
many  thousands  of  people  baptized  into 
the  Church.    The  mission  was  always 
self-sustaining   financially,   and   large 
sums  of  money  were  sent  to  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Church  from  the  tithes 
of  the  mission,  after  the  expenses  and 
building  programs  that  were  carried 
on  in  the  mission  field  itself  had  been 
cared  for. 

BINGHAM,  Erastus,  jun.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company 
B,  was  born  Sept.  30,  1822,  at  St. 
Johnsbury,  Vermont,  a  son  of  Eras- 
tus Bingham,  sen.,  and  Lucinda  Gates. 
After  his  arrival  in  Utah  he  lived  in 
Ogden  and  Huntsville.  During  the 
polygamy  troubles  he  went  with  his 
second  family  to  Arizona,  while  his 
first  family  remained  in  Weber  County. 
He  died  in  Mesa,  Arizona. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


733 


BINGHAM,  Wallace  D.,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  July  9,  1902,  in  Wilson, 
Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Brigham 
Heber  Bingham,  jun.,  and  Cathrin  Ro- 
zella  Wilson.  He  was  baptized  Aug. 
7,  1910,  by  William  M.  Holmes,  and 
later  ordained  an  Elder.  When  called 
on  his  mission  to  New  Zealand  he  was 
residing  in  the  Wilson  Ward,  near  Og- 
den,  Weber  Co.,  Utah.  Elder  Wilson, 
responding  to  the  call,  was  set  apart 
Nov.  20,  1923.  He  was  in  the  ministry 
only  a  few  months  when  he  died  April 
16,  1924,  from  injuries  he  had  sus- 
tained when  he  dived  into  the  Ta 
Hara  river.  His  body  was  taken 
to  Auckland  and  sent  home  for  burial. 
He  was  a  fine  young  man,  willing  and 
cheerful  in  his  duties.  He  graduated 
from  the  Weber  College  in  May,  1923, 
and  left  for  his  mission  Dec.  1,  1923. 
Services  were  held  June  8,  1924,  in 
the  Ogden  tabernacle. 

BINGHAM,  Thomas,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  B, 
was  born  July  19,  1824,  in  Grafton, 
New  Hampshire,  a  son  of  Erastus 
Bingham,  sen.,  and  Lucinda  Gates.  He 
received  his  endowments  in  the  Nau- 
voo  Temple,  enlisted  in  the  Mormon 
Battalion  July  16,  1846,  and  traveled 
with  that  body  some  distance  beyond 
Santa  Fe,  N.  M.  From  there  he  was 
sent  back  with  the  second  sick  detach- 
ment of  the  Battalion  to  winter  at 
Pueblo.  He  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  Val- 
ley July  29,  1847,  married  Caron  H. 
Holladay  Sept.  6,  1849,  moved  to  Og- 
den in  1850  and  was  called  to  go  to 
Califoi-nia  with  Apostle  C.  C.  Rich  and 
Amasa  M.  Lyman  in  1851,  but  re- 
turned to  Utah  in  1855.  In  1856  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  Salmon 
River  country  where  he  labored  among 
the  Lamanites.  During  the  "general 
move"  in  1858  he  went  to  Payson, 
Utah,  but  returned  north  and  settled 
in  Huntsville  in  1862.  There  he  acted 
as  counselor  to  Bishops  Jefferson  Hunt 
and  Francis  A.  Hammond.    In  1877  he 


moved  to  Ashley,  Uintah  Co.,  Utah, 
and  established  a  branch  of  the  Church 
at  that  place,  he  being  the  first  presid- 
ing Elder  and  later  Bishop  there.  He 
was  the  first  probate  judge  in  Uintah 
County,  serving  in  that  capacity  two 
terms.  He  died  Dec,  31,  1889,  in  Ash- 
ley Valley,  Utah. 

BIN  LEY,  John  Wesley,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  E, 
was  born  April  18,  1814,  at  Bellefon- 
taine,  Logan  Co.,  Ohio,  was  baptized 
in  1838,  moved  to  Nauvoo  in  1840, 
and  there  served  as  one  of  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith's  body  guards  until  the 
Prophet's  death.  He  was  a  member  of 
the  Nauvoo  police  force  and  was  or- 
dained a  Seventy  in  1844  (30th  Quo- 
rum); left  Nauvoo  in  1846;  was  at  Mt. 
Pisgah  when  Col.  Allen  arrived  there 
and  volunteered  his  services  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion.  He 
marched  to  California,  and  from  there 
accompanied  Gen.  Kearney  on  his  way 
back  to  the  States.  While  shoeing  a 
horse  on  the  Truckee  River  he  was 
kicked  severely,  whereby  his  back  was 
hurt  and  ribs  were  broken.  He  rode 
1000  miles  in  intense  pain,  and  also 
suffered  with  mountain  fever.  Continu- 
ing the  journey  from  the  "Valley"  he 
met  the  Pioneers  on  the  North  Platte; 
afterwards  he  was  sent  back  to  hurry 
up  the  companies  and  then  returned 
to  the  "Valley"  with  John  Neff  in  Jos. 
B.  Noble's  Fifty.  He  spent  the  winter 
in  the  "Fort"  and  in  the  spring  of 
1849  he  went  to  California  where  he 
worked  in  the  mines,  but  returned  to 
Utah  in  1858.  He  lived  at  Grantsville, 
also  at  Deep  Ci-eek,  and  later  at  Mill 
Creek,  Utah. 

BOLEY,  Samuel,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  B,  was 
one  of  the  first  men  who  enlisted  and 
was  also  the  first  man  to  die  on  the 
march;  he  died  July  23,  1846,  on  the 
Missouri  River. 

BOYLE,  Henry  Green,  a  member  of 
the    Mormon    Battalion,    Company   C, 


734 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


was  born  March  7,  1824,  in  Tazewell 
County,  Virginia,  a  son  of  John  Boyle 
and  Jane  Taylor.  He  was  baptized 
Nov.  20,  1843,  came  to  Nauvoo  in  1845, 
and  to  the  Missouri  River  in  1846.  He 
marched  with  the  Battalion  to  Cali- 
fornia. By  re-enlisting  he  served  an- 
other eight  months  in  the  Battalion, 
came  to  Salt  Lake  Valley,  and  went 
back  to  California  in  1851,  remaining 
there  until  1857.  In  1867-1869  he 
filled  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States, 
where  he  baptized  three  hundred  per- 
sons, and  brought  a  second  company 
of  160  Saints  from  the  South  to  Utah 
by  rail.  He  filled  a  second  mission  to 
the  South  and  returning  he  brought 
seventy  saints  with  him  to  Utah.  In 
all  he  filled  seven  missions  for  the 
Church.  He  died  in  November,  1908, 
in  Arizona. 

BRIMHALL,  John,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  C,  was 
born  April  16,  1824,  in  Steuben  Coun- 
ty, New  York.  Becoming  a  convert 
to  "Mormonism"  he  was  baptized  Oct. 
20,  1845,  enlisted  in  July,  1846,  in  the 
Battalion,  marched  to  Santa  Fe,  N_. 
M.,  where  he  was  placed  with  the  sick 
detachment  and  marched  to  Pueblo, 
where  he  spent  the  winter  of  1846- 
1847.  The  following  spring  (1847)  the 
sick  detachment  of  the  Battalion  and 
the  company  of  Mississippi  saints  who 
had  also  wintered  at  Pueblo,  continued 
the  journey  to  the  "Valley,"  where 
they  arrived  a  few  days  after  the  Pio- 
neers. Bro.  Brimhall  helped  to  make 
the  first  adobes  in  the  "Valley,"  pass- 
ed through  many  of  the  Indian  trou- 
bles as  a  military  man  and  experienced 
the  hardships  which  fell  to  the  lot  of 
the  early  pioneers.  After  changing 
residences  sevei-al  times,  he  died  at 
Glendale,  Kane  Co.,  Utah,  Dec.  18, 
1906,  at  the  age  of  82  years.  By  his 
wife,  Anna  Retta  Harris,  he  had  ten 
children,  eight  of  whom  were  living 
at  the  time  of  his  death. 

BRONSON,  Clinton  Doneral,  a  mem- 
ber of  the   Mormo©   Battalion,   Com- , 


pany  A,  was  born  Dec.  17,  1824,  in 
Mentor,  Lake  Co.,  Ohio,  a  son  of  Lem- 
on Bronson  and  Lucy  Brass.  He  was 
baptized  in  July,  1846,  and  after  his 
arrival  in  Utah  with  other  members 
of  the  Battalion,  he  participated  in 
the  Indian  Mission  to  Malad  Valley, 
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  Og- 
den,  and  acted  as  a  counselor  to  Pres. 
Jefferson  Hunt,  of  Huntsville,  Utah, 
for  ten  years.  He  also  served  in  the 
Echo  Canyon  war  as  captain  of  ten. 
He  was  known  as  a  man  who  had  a 
most  remarkable  memory. 

BROWN,  Frank  Lester,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Sept.  22,  1875,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  James  S.  Brown  and 
Eliza  Lester.  He  was  baptized  in  1883, 
by  John  Tingey.  In  his  early  man- 
hood he  attended  the  Latter-day  Saints 
University  and  was  a  studious  and  ac- 
tive member  of  the  missionary  classes 
in  1901-1902.  He  married  Winnifred 
Tibbs  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  Sept. 
24,  1902,  and  the  following  month  left 
with  his  wife  for  a  mission  to  Great 
Britain,  where  they  were  commended 
for  their  zealous  work.  On  Nov.  10, 
1904,  they  returned  with  their  little 
son,  Kenneth,  to  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah, 
where  Elder  Brown  resumed  his 
Church  activities.  In  1911  (March  21) 
he  was  called  by  the  Church  authori- 
ties to  take  charge  of  the  Joseph 
Smith  Memorial  Cottage  and  Farm 
near  South  Royalton,  Vermont.  In  the 
summer  of  1918  he  suffered  from  an 
attack  of  influenza,  and  failing  to  re- 
gain his  strength  he  finally  decided  to 
go  with  his  family  to  the  south,  but 
upon  reaching  Charlotte,  North  Caro- 
lina, was  too  sick  to  continue  his  jour- 
ney. He  was  taken  to  the  hospital 
at  Charlotte,  where  he  received  every 
care  and  attention,  but  on  Jan.  1,  1919, 
he  succumbed  to  pneumonia,  passing 
away  peacefully  in  the  same  country 
wjaere  his  father  was  born,  namely, 
Davidson  County,  North  Carolina.  His 
body  was  brought  home  to  Salt  Lake 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


735 


City,  where  it  was  buried  Jan.  10, 
1919.  Frank  L.  Brown  was  a  typical, 
stalwart  son  of  Utah,  and  was  loved 
by  all  who  knew  him.  His  zeal  as  a 
missionary  for  the  "Mormon"  Church 
was  a  heritage  from  his  father,  the 
Pacific  Islands  missionary,  James  S. 
Bi'own. 

BROWN,  James,  captain  of  Com- 
pany C  of  the  Mormon  Battalion.  (See 
Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  2,  p.  283.) 

BURNS,  James  Edward,  second 
Bishop  of  the  Bountiful  2nd  Ward, 
Davis  Co.,  Utah,  was  born  July  17, 
1880,  in  Bountiful,  Utah,  a  son  of  Char- 
les Burns  and  Susannah  Lord.  He  was 
educated  in  the  common  schools  at 
Bountiful  and  later  attended  the  Lat- 
ter-day Saints  College  in  Salt  Lake 
City.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  30,  1888, 
by  Samuel  Smedley  and,  taking  an 
active  part  in  Church  activities  suited 
to  his  age,  was  ordained  successively 
to  the  offices  of  Deacon,  Teacher  and 
Priest,  and  was  ordained  an  Elder 
Dec.  16,  1899,  by  Joseph  C.  Hepworth. 
On  Nov.  14,  1907,  he  was  ordained  a 
Seventy  by  Daniel  H.  Wood  and  filled 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain  in  1908- 
1909,  laboring  in  the  Manchester  Con- 
ference. His  wife,  who  up  to  that  time 
had  no  children,  met  him  in  England 
and  accompanied  him  home.  Soon 
after  his  return,  or  on  Dec.  19,  1909, 
Bro.  Burns  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Apostle  Orson  F.  Whitney,  on  which 
occasion  he  was  set  apart  as  second 
counselor  to  Bishop  Jed  Stringham  of 
the  Bountiful  2nd  Ward.  On  July  20, 
1915,  he  was  promoted  to  the  position 
of  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Stringham, 
which  position  he  held  until  March 
23,  1924,  when  he  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op by  Apostle  Melvin  J.  Ballard  and 
set  apart  to  preside  over  the  Bounti- 
ful 2nd  Ward. 

In  a  civil  capacity  Bishop  Burns 
served  three  two-year  terms  as  treas- 
urer for  the  city  of  Bountiful,  two 
years  as  city  recorder,  four  years  as 


city  councilman,  two  years  as  mayor, 
and  two  years  as  a  county  commission- 
er in  Davis  County.  He  is  a  farmer 
and  gardener  by  occupation.  On  Dec. 
28,  1904,  Elder  Burns  married  Emma 
May  Cooper,  daughter  of  Heber  K. 
Cooper  and  Emma  Jane  Hatch  Cooper. 
This  union  was  blessed  with  seven  chil- 
dren, namely,  Florence,  James  Cooper, 
May,  Alan  Cooper,  Grace,  June  and 
Carol. 

BURT,  Keith  Wynder,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  on  his  way  to  fill  a  foreign 
mission,  was  born  Sept.  19,  1908,  in 
Cardston,  Alberta,  Canada,  a  son  of 
William  Wilden  Burt  and  Edith  Wyn- 
der. He  was  baptized  Sept.  24,  1916, 
by  Ben  J.  Wood,  was  ordained  an  El- 
der, and  resided  at  the  place  of  his 
birth  when  he  was  called  to  the  South 
American  Mission.  Respondng  to  the 
call,  he  was  set  apart  for  his  mission- 
ary labors  Oct.  30,  1928.  He  left  Salt 
Lake  City  Nov.  3,  1928,  and  sailed 
from  New  York  with  his  fellow  com- 
panion. Elder  David  H.  Huish,  Nov. 
10,  1928,  on  the  ill-fated  S.  S.  "Ves- 
tris,"  which  sank  Nov.  12,  1928,  off 
the  coast  of  Virginia.  Elder  Huish 
was  one  of  those  rescued,  but  Elder 
Burt  was  drowned,  and  his  body  was 
not  found.  In  an  account  of  the  "Ves- 
tris"  disaster,  given  by  Elder  Huish, 
he  said  that  the  last  he  saw  of  his 
companion  was  when  the  life  boat  in 
which  they,  with  twenty-five  other 
people,  were  huddled,  turned  over  and 
all  were  forced  to  jump  into  the  mad- 
dened sea.  The  suction  caused  by 
the  ship  pulled  Elder  Huish  far  down 
into  the  water,  and  when  he  finally 
came  up  to  the  surface  again,  his 
companion  was  gone.  Elder  Huish 
speaking  of  himself  said  that  he  float- 
ed around  until  he  sighted  a  plank. 
Grabbing  it  he  held  on  until  a  life  boat 
came  to  his  rescue. 

CALDWELL,  Matthew,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company 
E,  was  born  June  11,  1822,  in  Jefferson 
County,  Illinois,  a  son  of  Curtis  Cald- 


736 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


well  and  Nancy  Hood.  He  was  bap- 
tized June  27,  1846,  and  three  weeks 
later  left  the  camps  of  the  saints 
on  the  Missouri  River  as  a  member 
of  the  Battalion.  He  marched  to  Cali- 
fornia and  returned  East  with  an  es- 
cort for  Gen.  Kearney  in  1847.  After 
residing  at  Council  Bluffs  till  1850,  he 
came  to  the  "Valley"  as  captain  of 
the  second  Fifty  of  Aaron  Johnson's 
Hundred;  was  one  of  the  first  settlers 
of  American  Fork,  where  he  built  the 
first  house  in  the  fall  of  1850.  He 
moved  to  Springville  in  1852,  and  la- 
ter resided  successively  in  Spanish 
Fork,  Fountain  Green,  Huntington 
(Emery  County),  and  Mountain  Dell 
in  Parley's  Canyon,  Salt  Lake  County. 
He  was  a  grandson  of  the  renowned 
Indian  fighter,  Matthew  Caldwell,  the 
man  after  whom  Caldwell  County, 
Missouri,  and  Caldwell  County,  Ken- 
tucky, were  named.     He  died  March 

15,  1912,  in  Vernal,  Utah. 

CAMPBELL,  Jonathan,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  E, 
was  born  in  Massachusetts  in  1805 
or  1806.  He  was  married  in  the  22nd 
year  of  his  life  and  became  the  fa- 
ther of  five  children.  In  1839  or  1840 
he  was  baptized  by  his  brother,  Bene- 
gar  Campbell,  gathered  with  the  saints 
to  Nauvoo  early  in  1844,  was  driven 
from  Illinois  across  the  Mississippi 
River  and  underwent  many  hardships 
during  the  general  exodus.  Having 
arrived  on  the  Missouri  River,  he  en- 
listed in  the  Mormon  Battalion  July 

16,  1846,  and  in  taking  his  departure 
for  California,  he  left  a  loving  wife 
and  three  small  children  and  every- 
thing that  was  dear  to  him.  He  never 
saw  his  wife  again,  as  she  died  at 
Council  Bluffs,  a  victim  to  the  many 
hardships  to  which  she  was  exposed. 
Her  three  small  children  were  brought 
to  the  "Valley"  in  the  emigration  of 
1847,  and  after  Bro.  Campbell's  dis- 
charge from  the  Battalion,  he  joined 
them  in  Utah  in  1848.  He  located  and 
helped  to  settle  North  Ogden,  where 


he  resided  until  the  time  of  his  death, 
which  occurred  there  Nov.  24,  1886. 
Bro.  Campbell  died,  as  he  had  lived, 
a  faithful  Latter-day  Saint. 

CANNON,  Sylvester  Quayle,  Pre- 
siding Bishop  of  the  Church  since 
1925,  was  born  June  10,  1877,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  George 
Quayle  Cannon  and  Elizabeth  Hoag- 
land.     He  was  the  youngest  of  eleven 


children  born  to  this  couple.  When  an 
infant  he  was  taken  by  his  parents  to 
Washington,  D.  C,  where  his  father 
was  in  Congress  as  a  delegate  from 
Utah.  His  childhood  was  spent  on  the 
Cannon  Farm  southwest  of  Salt  Lake 
City,  where  he  attended  a  private 
school  maintained  by  his  father.  From 
1889  to  1892  he  attended  the  Latter- 
day  Saints  College,  and,  having  quali- 
fied in  stenography,  he  accompanied 
his  father  as  secretary  on  a  trip  to  the 
Eastern  States  and  England.  In  1894- 
1895  he  pursued  special  studies  at  the 
University  of  Utah,  and  thereafter  at- 
tended the  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology  in  Boston,  Mass.,  for  a 
period  of  four  years,  graduating  there- 
from as  a  Bachelor  of  Science  in  June, 
1899,  having  majored  in  Mining  Engin- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


m 


eering  and  Metallurgy.  In  September, 
1899,  Elder  Cannon  left  home  for  a 
mission  to  Holland  and  Belgium  and 
was  assigned  to  labor  in  the  Liege  dis- 
trict in  Belgium.  Having  studied 
French  and  German  quite  extensively, 
he  was,  in  three  months,  placed  in 
charge  of  the  Seraing-Ougree  Branch, 
Belgium.  In  1900  he  was  appointed  to 
preside  over  the  Netherlands-Belgium 
Mission,  where  he  had  to  learn  the 
Dutch  language.  In  February,  1902, 
he  was  called  by  Pres.  Francis  M.  Ly- 
man to  visit  with  him  the  Turkish  Mis- 
sion as  "guide  and  interpreter".  On 
that  three-months  journey  he  visited 
Egypt,  Palestine,  Syria,  Turkey, 
Greece,  Italy  and  France  and  prepared 
a  series  of  articles  in  reference  to  the 
trip  for  the  "Millennial  Star".  After 
an  absence  of  three  years.  Elder  Can- 
non returned  home  and  was  engaged 
professionally  by  the  State  of  Utah  in 
a  survey  of  irrigated  lands  and  water 
from  the  Weber  River. 

In  March,  1904,  at  the  organization 
of  the  Pioneer  Stake,  he  was  appointed 
first  counselor  in  the  stake  presidency. 
On  June  15,  1904,  he  married  Winni- 
fred  Saville  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple. 
Four  sons  and  three  daughters  have 
been  born  of  this  union.  In  1907  Elder 
Cannon  was  again  appointed  to  pre- 
side over  the  Netherlands-Belgium 
Mission  and  to  supervise  the  publica- 
tion of  the  Doctrine  and  Covenants  in 
the  Dutch  language.  He  also  published 
a  new  and  improved  edition  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon  in  the  Netherlands, 
and  new  editions  of  the  French  and 
Dutch  hymn  books,  with  many  addi- 
tions and  improvements.  On  this  mis- 
sion he  was  accompanied  by  his  wife 
and  two  little  children. 

From  1917  to  1925  Elder  Cannon 
presided  ov^r  the  Pioneer  Stake  of 
Zion,  and  has  been  a  member  of  the 
Board  of  Control  of  the  Deseret  Gym- 
nasium since  1910  and,  since  1923, 
president  of  the  Board  of  Trustees  of 
the  L.  D.  S.  Business  College.  For 
one  year  he  acted  as  president  of  the 


Utah  Society  of  Engineers  and  in  1915 
was  accepted  as  a  member  of  the 
American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers, 

On  June  4, 1925,  he  was  ordained  and 
set  apart  by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant  as 
Presiding  Bishop  of  the  Church,  in 
which  capacity  he  has  general  supervi- 
sion of  the  following  activities:  Presi- 
dency of  the  Aaronic  Priesthood,  the 
temporal  affairs  of  the  various  wards 
with  the  ward  bishoprics;  receiving 
and  accounting  for  the  tithes,  offer- 
ings, and  other  donations;  preparation 
of  all  financial  and  statistical  reports; 
the  Church  relief  work  and  the  design 
and  construction  of  all  Church  build- 
ings. In  1930-1931  he  was  appointed 
chairman  of  the  Governor's  State 
Flood  Commission  and  in  1931-32  he 
acted  as  chairman  of  the  State  Advi- 
sory Council  for  Unemployment. 

CARTER,  Isaac  Philo,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  B, 
was  born  March  11,  1828,  in  Rutland 
County,  Vermont,  a  son  of  Gideon 
Carter  and  Hilah  Burwell.  He  enlist- 
ed in  the  Battalion  at  Council  Bluffs 
without  being  a  member  of  the 
Church,  and  marched  to  California. 
He  arrived  in  the  "Valley"  in  1849,  but 
went  back  to  San  Bernardino  in  1853, 
where  he  joined  the  Church,  and  mar- 
ried Amasa  M.  Lyman's  daughter.  He 
returned  to  Utah  in  1858  when  the  San 
Bernardino  settlement  was  broken  up, 
and  settled  in  Beaver,  Utah,  in  1859. 
He  died  July  27,  1913,  near  Heyburn, 
Idaho. 

CASPER,  William  Wallace,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Com- 
pany A,  was  born  March  12,  1821,  in 
Belleville,  Richland  Co.,  Ohio,  a  son 
of  William  Casper  and  Ovarilla  Dur- 
ben.  He  was  baptized  June  7,  1834, 
by  Solomon  Hancock  and  moved  with 
his  family  in  1837  to  Caldwell  County, 
Missouri,  where  he  remained  two 
years;  later  he  lived  in  other  places, 
and  finally  arrived  in  Nauvoo,  111.,  in 
the  spring  of  1841.    Having  reached 


Vol.  IV.  No.  47 


November  21.  1936 


738 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


the  Missouri  River  with  the  "Camps 
of  Israel,"  he  enlisted  with  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion  July  16,  1846,  and  leav- 
ing his  wife  and  one  child  he  marched 
with  the  Battalion  to  California,  where 
he  was  discharged  in  July,  1847.  He 
arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  Oct. 
18,  1847,  and  settled  in  Mill  Creek  in 
1848,  participated  in  the  Walker  war 
in  1853,  and  later  filled  a  mission  to 
the  Muddy  (in  Nevada).  He  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  June  20,  1892, 
by  Geo.  B.  Wallace  and  later  ordained 
a  Patriarch.  He  was  married  three 
times  and  was  the  father  of  eighteen 
children.  During  the  last  two  years  of 
his  life  he  did  a  great  deal  of  Temple 
work.  He  died  July  17,  1908,  at  his 
home  in  Mill  Creek,  Utah. 

CASTO,  William  W.,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  D, 
was  born  Feb.  10,  1816,  at  Orleans, 
Orange  Co.,  Indiana.  He  was  baptized 
at  Commerce,  June  22,  1839,  by  Joseph 
Rose,  being  the  first  one  of  his  fam- 
ily to  join  the  Church,  and  it  is  sup- 
posed that  he  was  the  first  person 
baptized  in  Nauvoo.  When  Joseph 
and  Hyrum  were  incarcerated  in  the 
Carthage  jail,  Elder  Casto  was  one 
of  twenty-five  men  who  volunteered 
to  risk  their  lives  in  rescuing  the 
Prophet  from  prison.  In  the  winter 
of  1844  he  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
and  became  a  member  of  the  26th  Quo- 
rum of  Seventy.  At  the  time  of  the 
exodus  in  1840  he  sold  a  house  and 
lot  worth  $500  for  $25,  and  for  a  valu- 
able ten-acre  lot,  beautifully  located 
a  short  distance  east  of  Nauvoo,  he 
never  received  a  cent.  He  even  had 
to  fiee  from  Nauvoo  in  the  night  to 
avoid  an  unjust  writ,  and  barely  es- 
caped with  his  life.  Arriving  at  the 
camps  of  the  saints  on  the  Missouri 
River,  just  as  the  call  for  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion  came  from  the  govern- 
ment, he  enlisted,  but  on  account  of 
illness  was  sent  with  the  sick  detach- 
ment to  Pueblo,  where  he  with  many 
others  wintered.    In  the  spring  of  1847 


he  started  for  the  "Valley''  and  was 
one  of  twelve  men  who  overtook  the 
Pioneers  on  Green  River.  He  entered 
the  "Valley"  as  one  of  Orson  Pratt's 
advance  company.  Returning  to  the 
States  in  the  fall  of  1847,  he  found 
his  family  all  well  at  Council  Bluffs. 
He  returned  to  the  "Valley"'  the  fol- 
lowing year,  arriving  there  Nov.  16, 
1848,  after  having  traveled  four  hun- 
dred miles  on  foot  through  ice  and 
snow.  He  returned  to  the  States  in 
1849  and  remained  there  until  1851, 
when  he  brought  his  family  west,  set- 
tling in  Herriman,  Salt  Lake  Co.  La- 
ter he  spent  several  years  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Muddy.  He  died  Nov.  9, 
1894,  at  Big  Cottonwood,  Utah. 

CHASE,  John  Darwin,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company 
B,  was  born  Aug.  10,  1815,  in  Bristol, 
Addison  Co.,  Vermont,  a  son  of  Ab- 
ner  Chase  and  Amy  Scott.  He  re- 
moved as  a  young  man  to  New  York 
State,  where  he  married  Priscilla 
McHenry.  He  was  baptized  by  Pala- 
tiah  Brown  about  1841,  came  to  Nau- 
voo in  1842,  where  he  worked  in  the 
Temple,  and  performed  a  mission  to 
Vermont  in  1844.  In  1845  he  was 
ordained  a  High  Priest  and  set  apart 
as  first  counselor  to  Bishop  Israel 
Calkins,  who  presided  over  a  branch 
of  the  Church  near  Nauvoo.  He  after- 
wards succeeded  Calkins  as  Bishop, 
coming  west  with  Geo.  A.  Smith  in 
1846  to  the  Missouri  River,  he  enlisted 
in  the  Mormon  Battalion  and  march- 
ed as  a  corporal  in  Company  B  to 
Santa  Fe,  thence  to  Pueblo,  where  he 
wintered.  He  arrived  in  the  Valley  in 
Captain  Brown's  company  in  July, 
1847.  He  took  part  in  building  the  Old 
Fort  in  Great  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
helped  to  build  the  first  sawmill  in 
Utah,  south  of  the  city  (Chase's  Mill). 
In  1849,  with  Isaac  Morley  and  others 
he  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  in  San- 
pete Valley.  Afterwards  he  was  ap- 
pointed by  Erastus  Snow  to  preside 
as  Bishop  in  Ephraim,  and  later  called 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


739 


to  the  Carson  Valley  Mission,  where 
he  acted  as  a  High  Councilor,  remain- 
ing there  till  the  colony  broke  up.  He 
settled  in  Nephi,  took  an  active  part 
in  all  ward  affairs,  and  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Juab  Stake  High  Council. 
He  moved  to  Huntington  in  June,  1890, 
where  he  died  in  1902.  Bro.  Chase 
filled  a  mission  to  England  in  1861- 
1864. 

CHENEY,  Zaccheus,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  B, 
was  born  April  22,  1818,  at  Sempon- 
eous,  Cayuga  Co.,  New  York,  a  son 
of  Elijah  Cheney.  His  father  served 
one  year  in  the  war  of  1812.  Jared 
Carter  preached,  baptized  and  organ- 
ized a  branch  of  the  Church  in  Onon- 
daga County,  N.  Y.,  Elder  Cheney's 
father  being  one  of  the  number.  In 
1835  the  family  moved  to  Kirtland, 
Ohio,  where  Zaccheus  first  saw  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith.  Elder  Cheney 
worked  on  the  Temple,  attended  the 
Hebrew  School,  and  was  a  member  of 
the  Nauvoo  Legion.  He  was  in  Nau- 
voo  when  some  of  the  saints  crossed 
the  Mississippi  River  on  the  ice,  and 
soon  after  Nauvoo  was  nearly  evacu- 
ated. He  crossed  the  river  at  Fort 
Madison  May  3,  1846,  and  overtook 
the  saints  at  Mount  Pisgah,  where  he 
joined  the  Mormon  Battalion  and 
marched  with  them  to  California. 
After  his  discharge  he  remained  in 
San  Francisco  and  helped  to  burn  the 
first  brick  made  in  that  city.  He  mar- 
ried Mary  Ann  Fisher  July  11,  1848, 
and  on  Dec.  25,  1850,  his  wife  gave 
birth  to  a  daughter.  The  wife  died  Jan. 
1,  1851,  and  was  buried  near  the  San 
Jose  Mission.  Brother  Cheney  came 
to  Utah  in  1857  (Nov.  3rd)  and  died 
at  Centerville,  Davis  Co.,  March  7, 
1898. 

CHRISTIANSEN,  Peter  S.,  an  El- 
der who  died  while  filling  a  foreign 
mission,  was  born  Feb.  26,  1861,  in 
Aarslev,  Aarhus  amt,  Denmark,  a  son 
of  Saren   C.    Christiansen   and   Anne 


K.  Andreasen.  He  was  baptized  Jan. 
4,  1891,  by  F.  C.  Mikkelsen,  and  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  1913.  He  was  re- 
siding in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  when 
he  was  called  to  fill  a  mission  to  Den- 
mark. He  accepted  the  call,  being  set 
apart  May  3,  1926.  Elder  Christian- 
sen had  been  in  his  field  of  labor  only 
a  few  months  when  he  died  of  heart 
failure  Jan.  25,  1927,  in  Copenhagen, 
Denmark.  At  the  time  of  his  death 
he  held  the  positions  of  president  of 
the  Copenhagen  District,  and  assistant 
editor  of  the  mission  organ,  "Skandi- 
naviens  Stjerne."  Funeral  services 
were  held  for  him  in  the  Latter-day 
Saints  chapel  on  Korsgade  No.  11,  Co- 
penhagen. Sister  Christiansen,  who 
had  labored  with  her  husband  on  his 
mission,  and  Elder  L.  Gregerson,  who 
had  been  released,  accompanied  the 
remains  to  Salt  Lake  City.  Ser- 
vices were  held  Feb.  19,  1928,  in  the 
Waterloo  Ward  chapel.  The  remains 
were  interred  in  the  Wasatch  Lawn 
cemetery.  (See  History  of  the  Scan- 
dinavian Mission,  p.  493.) 

CLARK,  Riley  Garner,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  A, 
was  born  July  29,  1829,  in  Cincinnati, 
Ohio,  a  son  of  Samuel  Clark  and  Re- 
becca Garner.  His  parents  were  Quak- 
ers, who  became  converted  to  "Mor- 
monism"  at  Martinsville,  Ohio,  and 
went  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois.  When  the 
general  exodus  took  place  from  Illi- 
nois in  1846,  Riley  went  with  his  fam- 
ily as  far  as  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa, 
where  he  enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion and  marched  with  them  to  Cali- 
fornia. He  made  his  way  to  Great 
Salt  Lake  Valley  from  California  in 
1848.  In  the  spring  of  1850  he  mar- 
ried Amanda  Williams,  who  bore  him 
sixteen  children.  In  1852  he  was  called 
to  Manti,  Utah,  by  Pres.  Brigham 
Young  to  build  a  tannery  and  shoe 
shop.  After  he  had  spent  seven  years 
building  up  that  industry,  he  moved 
to  Kanarra,  and  from  there  to  Pan- 
guitch,  which  he  assisted  in  settling. 


740 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


and  where  he  built  a  tannery  and  also 
helped  to  build  a  grist  mill.  As  a  Sev- 
enty in  the  Church  he  was  a  faithful 
woi'ker,  always  finding  time  to  attend 
to  his  Church  duties  in  the  midst  of 
all  his  industrial  tasks.  Bro.  Clark 
died  at  Panguitch  July  11,  1876,  leav- 
ing a  wife  and  nine  children,  all  of 
whom  she  reared  to  manhood  and 
womanhood.  She  died  Feb.  6,  1920,  at 
Panguitch,  and  at  the  time  of  her 
demise  her  descendants  numbered  251 
souls,  including  16  children,  74  grand- 
children, 154  great-grandchildren  and 
five   great-great-grandchildren. 

COMI»TON,  Allen,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  D,  was 
born  Jan.  10,  1809,  in  Wilson  County, 
Tennessee,  a  son  of  William  Comp- 
ton.  On  Jan.  13,  1832,  he  married 
Mary  Bettice.  In  June,  1845,  he  moved 
to  Hancock  County,  Illinois,  and  on 
May  2,  1846,  a  mob  numbering  eight- 
een persons  rode  up  to  the  door,  called 
the  father  out  and  told  him  to  get  his 
family  out  of  the  house  immediately. 
As  soon  as  they  were  out  the  mob  fired 
the  house;  the  Compton  family  were 
not  allowed  to  take  anything  with 
them.  They  took  passage  on  the  steam- 
er "St.  Cl-oix"  and  started  to  follow  the 
saints  who  had  preceded  them  in  the 
great  exodus.  They  arrived  at  Coun- 
cil Bluffs  on  the  3rd  of  July.  Colonel 
Allen  had  come  into  the  camp  the  day 
before  to  enlist  five  hundred  men  to 
go  to  Mexico,  and  Bro.  Compton  be- 
came one  of  the  number.  He  left 
his  family  camped  in  the  corner  of 
a  worn  fence  with  nothing  to  protect 
them  from  the  scorching  sun  during 
the  day,  or  the  heavy  dews  at  night, 
but  a  piece  of  wagon  cover  stretched 
on  the  fence.  Two  of  his  children 
were  sick  with  the  ague.  The  Bat- 
talion marched  from  Fort  Leaven- 
worth, leaving  the  sick  detachment — 
among  whom  was  Bro.  Compton — to 
winter  at  Pueblo.  In  the  spring  of 
1847  Captain  Higgins'  Company  was 


sent  to  Fort  Laramie,  Bro.  Compton 
being  one  of  them.  They  met  Amasa 
M.  Lyman  just  before  arriving  at  Fort 
Laramie.  The  company  overtook  the 
Pioneers  on  Green  River,  arriving  in 
Salt  Lake  Valley  on  July  22,  1847.  Bro. 
Compton  started  back  on  Aug.  24,  ar- 
riving home  on  Nov,  18th,  1847,  and 
started  back  again  for  the  Valley  Oct. 
14,  1848,  with  the  mail  (that  being  the 
first  mail  that  came  to  Utah),  arriving 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Nov.  30.  The  In- 
dians were  troublesome  during  the 
winter,  and  Bro.  Compton  was  sent 
with  Capt.  Scott  to  battle  them  near 
Provo.  After  the  April  conference 
Bro.  Compton  was  asked  to  return  to 
Council  Bluffs,  build  some  flat  boats 
when  he  arrived  there,  and  ferry  the 
saints  across  the  Missouri  River, 
which  he  did,  operating  the  Lone  Tree 
Ferry  in  1851-1852,  the  one  known  as 
Busha's  Ferry  in  1853.  Then  he  moved 
up  and  ran  the  ferry  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters. He  died  Aug.  17,  1854,  in  Coun- 
cil Bluffs,  Iowa. 

CURTIS,  Dorr  Purdy,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  B, 
was  born  Jan.  21,  1819,  in  Simpronius 
(now  Moravia)  County,  New  York,  a 
son  of  Beriah  Curtis  and  Phoebe  Pur- 
dy. He  was  baptized  March  15,  1841, 
in  Moravia,  N.  Y.,  by  Palatiah  Brown; 
came  to  Nauvoo  in  1843,  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  Nauvoo,  came  west  in 
the  1846  exodus,  enlisted  in  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion,  marched  to  Califor- 
nia, and  came  to  the  "Valley"  in  1847. 
He  was  married  in  1848,  his  wife  be- 
ing already  one  of  the  settlers  of 
Kaysville,  Davis  Co.,  Utah.  He  filled 
a  mission  to  England  in  1851-1854; 
acted  as  a  Bishop's  counselor  in  the 
Kaysville  and  Springville  wards,  in 
Utah,  and  moved  to  Springville  during 
the  "Move"'  of  1858.  He  was  a  very 
active  man  in  military  affairs,  having 
been  commissioned  as  a  colonel  by 
the  Governor.  He  moved  from  Spring- 
ville to  Oakley,  Idaho,  and  died  Nov. 
8,  1904. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


741 


CUTLER,  Ralph,  first  counselor  in 
the  Cottonwood  Stake  presidency  from 
1927  to  1930,  was  born  Dec.  13,  1873, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
John  Cutler  and  Sarah  Atkinson.  After 
attending  the  public  schools,  he  stud- 
ied two  years  at  the  Salt  Lake  Stake 
Academy  (later  the  L.  D.  S.  College) 
in  Salt  Lake  City.  He  was  baptized 
Feb.  28,  1881,  by  John  Cottam  and 
taking  an  active  part  in  Church  mat- 
ters from  his  early  youth,  he  was  or- 
dained a  Deacon  March  24,  1889.  In 
January,  1889,  he  took  a  position  as 
stenographer  and  bookkeeper  at  the 
Deseret  News,  Salt  Lake  City,  and  re- 
mained in  the  employ  of  that  institu- 
tion until  1896.  In  October,  1894,  he 
was  appointed  secretary  and  treasur- 
er of  the  20th  Ward  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
and  also  became  a  teacher  in  the  ward 
Sunday  school.  He  was  ordained  an 
Elder  Feb.  3,  1895,  by  David  R.  Lyon, 
and  in  the  winter  of  1896  he  went  to 
Arizona  for  the  benefit  of  his  health, 
and  resided  in  Mesa  City  until  1899. 
While  there  he  acted  as  ward  clei'k, 
as  stake  secretary  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A., 
and  as  first  assistant  to  the  stake  su- 
perintendent of  religion  classes.  In 
1889-1890,  he  filled  a  mission  to  the 
Southern  States,  laboring  principally 
in  the  State  of  Ohio.  After  returning 
from  that  mission  he  engaged  in  truck 
gardening  and  settled  in  the  Farmers 
Ward,  where  he  acted  as  ward  super- 
intendent of  the  religion  class  and  later 
as  ward  clerk.  In  1902  he  married  Vir- 
ginia L.  Burton,  daughter  of  Gen.  Rob- 
ert T.  Burton,  which  union  has  been 
blessed  with  eight  children,  namely, 
Ralph  Garr,  Douglas  B.,  Geneve,  Le- 
nore,  Roberta,  Louise,  Alice  May  and 
Ivan  Burton.  In  1910  he  moved  to 
the  Winder  Ward,  where  he  took  an 
active  part  in  the  Ward  Sunday 
school,  and  when  the  Cottonwood 
Stake  was  organized  in  1914,  he  was 
chosen  as  first  assistant  in  the  stake 
superintendency  of  Sunday  schools. 
He  was  ordained  a  High  Priest  and 
set  apart  as  an  alternate  member  of 


the  High  Council  by  Uriah  G.  Miller 
March  12,  1922,  and  labored  in  that 
capacity  until  Nov.  20,  1927,  when  he 
was  chosen  as  first  counselor  to  Henry 
D.  Moyle  in  the  stake  presidency  of 
the  Cottonwood   Stake. 

DANIELSON,  Herman  Kerr,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  Aug.  30,  1890,  in  Lewiston, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Herman  H. 
Danielsen  and  Clara  J.  Kerr.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  24,  1898,  by  Andrew 
L.  Hyer,  and  later  ordained  a  Seventy. 
On  Dec.  7,  1916,  while  still  residing 
in  Lewiston,  he  was  set  apart  for  a 
mission  to  Great  Britain.  He  labored 
with  zeal  and  success  in  the  Liverpool 
and  Newcastle  conferences  and  was 
president  of  the  Irish  Conference  at 
the  time  of  his  death,  which  occurred 
March  9,  1919,  in  Belfast,  Ireland,  due 
to  pneumonia.  He  was  a  fine  mission- 
ary, and  one  of  the  best  liked  Elders 
in  the  field.  His  body  was  prepared 
for  shipment  to  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
left  Liverpool  March  12,  1919,  in 
charge  of  Elder  Charles  Welchman, 
who  had  been  honorably  released 
to  return  home.  Bro.  Danielsen  was 
energetic  in  his  work,  absolutely  fear- 
less, always  ready  to  bear  his  testi- 
mony to  the  truth. 

DAVIS,  Daniel  C,  Captain  of  Com- 
pany E,  of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was 
born  Feb.  23,  1804,  in  New  York.  He 
became  a  member  of  the  Mormon 
Church  and  was  numbered  among  the 
saints  upon  their  arrival  at  Council 
Bluffs.  He  enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion in  1846,  and  made  the  march 
across  the  continent.  After  his  dis- 
chai-ge  he  became  the  commanding 
officer  of  a  company  of  about  one 
hundred  that  re-enlisted  for  another 
six  months'  service  in  California.  Upon 
being  mustered  out  of  service  he  came 
to  Utah  with  other  members  of  the 
Battalion,  settling  a  short  distance 
south  of  Farmington,  or  fourteen 
miles  north  of  Salt  Lake  City.    Davis 


742 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


County  was  named  after  him.  He  re- 
mained at  his  home  near  Farmington 
until  1850.  That  year  he  started  east 
on  personal  business,  and  died  en  route 
at  Fort  Kearney  on  the  1st  of  June, 
1850. 

DAVIS,  Susan,  wife  of  Capt.  Daniel 
C.  Davis,  a  member  of  the  Mormon 
Battalion,  accompanied  her  husband 
all  the  way  to  California  with  the  Bat- 
talion. 

DODGE,  Augustus  Erastus,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Com- 
pany C,  was  born  Dec.  6.  1822,  in  Jef- 
ferson County,  New  York,  a  son  of 
Erastus  Dodge  and  Melissa  Morgan. 
He  was  baptized  March  15,  1835,  in 
Missouii,  by  Jacob  Gates,  worked  on 
the  Kirtland  Temple,  was  a  prisoner 
with  his  father  and  others  at  the  sur- 
render of  Far  West  for  eight  or  ten 
days,  and  was  one  of  those  that  were 
driven  from  their  homes  in  winter  and 
suffered  much.  His  father  died  in  1843 
and  his  mother  in  1845.  He  assisted  in 
building  the  Nauvoo  House  and  Tem- 
ple; helped  William  Clayton  and  oth- 
ers to  convey  Church  property  to  Mt. 
Pisgah  and  arrived  in  Council  Bluffs 
July  15,  1846,  started  the  next  day 
on  his  march  to  California  with  the 
Battalion,  and  when  crossing  the  Ar- 
kansas River  he  had  his  ankle  mash- 
ed, but  continued  down  the  Rio  Grande 
and  on  to  California,  striking  the  Pa- 
cific Ocean  near  San  Diego.  After 
staying  there  for  six  weeks  he  march- 
ed to  Los  Angeles  where  the  members 
of  the  Battalion  were  discharged  in 
1847.  He  crossed  the  Coast  Range  to 
Sacramento,  then  across  the  Sierra 
Nevada  and  the  desert  to  Fort  Hall, 
and  from  there  to  Salt  Lake  City,  ar- 
riving Dec.  23,  1847.  He  helped  es- 
tablish the  ferry  at  Green  River  in 
1849,  settled  Sanpete  Valley  that  year, 
and  was  called  to  settle  Dixie  in  1861. 

ERNST,  Carl  Edward,  one  of  the 
Elders    who    died    in    the    missionary 


field,  was  born  Dec.  4,  1863,  in  Dros- 
kau  near  Sorau  (Nieder  Lausitz),  Ger- 
many, a  son  of  Carl  Gottlieb  Ernst 
and  Auguste  Karoline  Lehman.  He 
was  baptized  May  24,  1893,  by  John 
Vetterli,  and  later  emigrated  to  Amer- 
ica. He  was  residing  in  the  Center 
Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  when  he 
was  called  to  fill  a  mission  in  the 
Swiss  and  German  Mission.  Respond- 
ing to  the  call  he  was  set  apart  Dec. 
1,  1921,  having  previously  been  or- 
dained a  Seventy.  He  arrived  in  the 
missionary  field  Dec.  22,  1921,  and 
was  appointed  to  labor  in  Bremen, 
where  he  performed  a  successful  and 
faithful  missionary  work.  Soon  his 
health  began  to  fail  and  he  was  sent 
to  Tielits  near  Sorau,  Germany,  for 
treatment,  but  as  his  condition  be- 
came worse  the  mission  president  re- 
leased him  to  return  to  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  received  an  honorable  release  and 
would  have  started  home  when  his 
call  came  to  the  other  side.  He  was 
buried  at  Tielits.  In  March,  1923,  the 
body  was  exhumed  and  shipped  to 
Utah.  Elder  Ludwig  Gleich  was  hon- 
orably released  to  accompany  the  re- 
mains home.  Services  were  held  in 
the  14th  Ward  chapel  March  11,  1923. 
Interment  took  place  in  the  city  cem- 
etery. Elder  Ernst  had  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Northern  States  in  1904- 
1906. 

ESPLIN,  Edgar  Cox,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
March  8,  1887,  in  Orderville,  Kane  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Henry  W.  Esplin  and 
Philena  Cox.  He  was  baptized  April 
5,  1895,  by  Fred  J.  Carroll,  and  later 
ordained  a  Seventy.  When  called  to 
fill  his  mission  in  the  Eastern  States, 
he  was  residing  in  Orderville,  Utah. 
Responding  to  the  call,  he  was  set 
apart  Nov.  24,  1925.  Elder  Esplin  was 
a  short-term  missionary,  and  had  been 
in  his  field  of  labor  less  than  a  month 
when  he  died  of  pneumonia  Dec.  7, 
1925,  in  Charleston,  West  Virginia. 
The  body  of  Elder  Esplin  was  brought 
home  by  Elder  Sidney  R.  Godfrey. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


743 


EVANS,  Israel,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  B,  was 
born  Oct.  2,  1828,  at  Hanover,  Colum- 
biana Co.,  Ohio,  a  son  of  David  Evans 
and  Mary  Beck.  He  was  baptized  when 
eight  years  old  in  Missouri,  was  at  the 
Haun's  Mill  Massacre  in  Missouri  Oct, 
30,  1838,  his  mother  and  himself  hid- 
ing in  the  underbrush.  He  enlisted  as 
a  private  in  Company  B  of  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion  July  16,  1846,  and 
marched  overland  to  California.  After 
disbanding  he  went  to  work  at  Sut- 
ter's Mill,  where  gold  was  discovered, 
worked  long  enough  to  enable  him  to 
return  to  Utah,  and  arrived  in  Great 
Salt  Lake  City  Oct.  1,  1848.  He  mar- 
ried Matilda  A.  Thomas  Jan.  1,  1849, 
settled  in  Lehi,  Utah,  filled  a  mission 
to  England  in  1853-1857,  and  on  his 
return  had  charge  of  the  Israel  Evans 
handcart  company,  consisting  of  31 
handcarts  and  134  souls.  He  was  may- 
or of  Lehi  one  term,  and  a  member 
of  the  city  council.  He  died  May  31, 
1896,  in  Lehi,  respected  by  all  who 
knew  him. 

FERGUSON,  James,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  sergeant-ma- 
jor in  Company  A,  was  born  Feb.  23, 
1828,  at  Belfast,  Ireland,  a  son  of 
Francis  and  Mary  Ferguson.  He  was 
one  of  the  most  brilliant  and  capable 
of  the  younger  men  of  Utah  of  pio- 
neer days,  and  came  first  into  histor- 
ical prominence  when  he  enlisted  in 
the  Mormon  Battalion.  He  made  his 
way  to  Utah  immediately  after  he  was 
discharged  from  the  Battalion  and 
later  served  as  adjutant-general  of  the 
Utah  state  militia.  He  was  leading 
man  for  the  Deseret  Dramatic  Asso- 
ciation. When  Johnston's  army  was 
approaching  Utah  during  the  winter 
of  1857-1858,  he  wrote  a  ringing  epis- 
tle, as  adjutant-general,  to  his  old  Bat- 
talion commander,  Col.  Philip  St. 
George  Cooke,  who  was  with  John- 
ston's troops.  Still  later,  in  1859,  he 
was  one  of  the  founders  and  the  prin- 
cipal   writer    of    a    local    publication 


called  "The  Mountaineer."  He  died 
Aug.  30,  1863,  in  Salt  Lake  City,  while 
still  a  comparatively  young  man.  He 
was  handsome,  dashing,  eloquent,  and 
incisive,  and  was  equally  brilliant  as 
soldier,  lawyer,  actor  and  orator. 

FORSGREN,  John  Erik,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  D, 
was  born  Nov.  7,  1816,  in  Gefle,  Swe- 
den, a  son  of  Johan  0.  Forsgren  and 
Anna  Christina  Olson.  His  early  life 
was  that  of  a  sailor,  and  at  the  age 
of  twenty  years  he  became  acquainted 
with  the  Latter-day  Saints  in  Boston, 
Mass.,  where  he  was  baptized  July  16, 
1843.  In  1844  he  went  to  Nauvoo  and 
there  made  the  acquaintance  of  the 
Prophet  Joseph  Smith  and  the  saints. 
He  afterwards  marched  with  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion  to  California,  being 
one  of  the  two  Scandinavian  members 
of  that  body.  He  arrived  in  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in  1847.  In  1849-1853,  he  filled 
his  famous  mission  to  Scandinavia  and 
baptized  the  first  person  in  his  native 
land,  his  own  brother,  Peter  Adolph 
Forsgren,  July  26,  1850.  He  died  in 
Salt  Lake  City  Jan.  22,  1890,  in  great 
poverty,  a  non-member  of  the  Church. 

GIBBONS,  Edward  Richard,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  May  14,  1894,  in  St.  Johns, 
Apache  Co.,  Arizona,  a  son  of  Rich- 
ard Gibbons  and  Clara  Isabell  Wil- 
helm.  He  was  baptized  Aug.  7,  1904, 
and  later  ordained  to  the  office  of  an 
Elder.  When  he  was  called  on  his 
mission,  he  was  living  in  Tempe,  Mari- 
copa Co.,  Arizona.  After  accepting 
his  call  he  was  set  apart  Nov.  21,  1916, 
to  labor  in  the  Western  States  Mis- 
sion, but  when  a  part  of  this  mission 
was  added  to  the  Mexican  Mission  he 
came  under  Pres.  Rey  L.  Pratt's  juris- 
diction, and  while  serving  in  this  field 
of  labor  he  contracted  a  case  of  influ- 
enza from  which  he  died  Nov.  3,  1918, 
in  Rameo,  Colorado.  The  father  of 
Elder  Gibbons  went  to  Colorado  and 
brought  the  body  of  his  son  home  to 
Tempe,  Arizona,  where  it  was  buried. 


744 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


GODDARD,  Benjamin,  president  of 
the  Temple  Square  Mission  and  man- 
ager of  the  Bureau  of  Information  in 
Salt  Lake   City,   Utah,  from   1902  to 


1929,  was  born  July  27,  1851,  in  Hud- 
dersfield,  Yorkshire,  England,  and  died 
in  Salt  Lake  City  Dec.  5,  1930.  (See 
page  239.) 

GRUNDER,  Albert,  an  Elder  who 
died  in  the  missionary  field,  was  born 
Oct.  28,  1894,  in  Logan,  Cache  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Fred  Grunder  and  Ver- 
na  Pauli  Grunder.  He  was  baptized 
Dec.  16,  1902,  by  W.  A.  Simmons,  and 
later  ordained  an  Elder.  While  still 
residing  at  Logan  he  was  called  on 
a  mission  to  the  Southern  States,  being 
set  apart  Jan.  11,  1921.  He  had  been 
in  the  mission  field  only  six  weeks 
when  he  died  very  suddenly  of  an  ill- 
ness which  lasted  only  four  days.  The 
doctors  pronounced  his  disease  as  in- 
flammation of  the  brain  from  which 
he  died  March  3,  1921,  in  a  hospital 
in  Columbus,  Ohio.  He  was  twenty- 
six  years  old,  and  left  a  wife  to 
mourn  his  loss.     He  was  an  excellent 


missionary,  manifesting  a  spirit  of 
devotion  and  loyalty  to  the  work  of 
the  Lord,  and  he  enjoyed  the  spirit  of 
his  calling  abundantly.  His  conduct 
was  exemplary  and  he  had  won  the 
respect  of  the  people  among  whom  he 
labored.  All  felt  strongly  impressed 
that  this  good  brother  was  wanted 
on  the  other  side,  there  to  continue 
his  mission. 

HANCOCK,  Charles  B.,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company 
C,  was  born  Dec.  23,  1823,  in  Columbia 
County,  Ohio,  a  son  of  Solomon  Han- 
cock and  Alta  Adams.  He  was  bap- 
tized April  6,  1833,  by  his  father,  in 
Jackson  County,  Mo.,  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty in  Illinois  in  1842,  marched  with 
the  Battalion  to  California,  and  after 
being  discharged  from  that  service  he 
came  to  the  "Valley,"  arriving  Oct. 
30,  1847.  He  camped  on  the  Jordan 
River  during  the  first  winter  he  spent 
in  the  Valley,  to  watch  the  Indians, 
worked  on  the  Church  Farm  for  three 
winters,  and  was  called  to  settle  at 
Payson  in  1850.  Once  he  went  back 
to  the  Sweetwater  to  help  bring  in 
immigrating  saints,  was  the  second 
Bishop  of  Payson  Ward  from  1854  to 
1861,  and  helped  to  build  up  the  set- 
tlement. He  moved  to  Ogden,  and  la- 
ter to  Harrisville,  Utah,  where  he  died 
Jan.  24,  1904. 

HARRIS,  Robert,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  E,  was 
born  Dec.  26,  1808,  in  Gloucestershire, 
England,  a  son  of  Robert  Harris  and 
Sarah  Okey.  He  was  baptized  about 
1840  by  Wilford  Woodruff,  came  to 
America  in  1841  and  was  with  the 
saints  during  their  early  persecutions 
of  1846.  After  serving  in  the  Mormon 
Battalion,  he  went  back  east  for  his 
family  by  way  of  Fort  Hall,  in  1847, 
and  brought  them  to  Utah  in  1850. 
He  settled  in  Kaysville  in  1851,  went 
to  Payson  during  the  "Move,"  took 
part  in  the  Morrisite  war,  and  also 
in  the  Echo  Canyon  war,  was  called 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


745 


to  go  to  the  "Muddy"  in  1867,  spent 
three  years  in  Malad  "Valley,  from 
1871  to  1875,  and  died  in  Kaysvillc, 
Utah,  Feb.  29,  1876. 

HASKELL,  George  N.,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company 
B,  was  born  Oct.  24,  1795,  in  Danbury, 
Grafton  Co.,  New  Hampshire,  removed 
to  Nauvoo  in  1840,  and  there  joined 
the  Latter-day  Saints.  He  underwent 
persecutions  in  Illinois  in  common 
with  the  saints,  who  were  driven  out 
of  that  state  in  1846;  traveled  to  the 
Missouri  River  and  enlisted  in  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  leaving  his  family 
on  the  banks  of  the  Missouri  River, 
among  the  Pottawattamie  Indians.  He 
marched  with  the  Battalion  to  the  Pa 
cific  Ocean,  a  distance  of  over  2,000 
miles,  and  was  honorably  discharged. 
He  returned  to  Winter  Quarters  in 
1848,  crossed  the  plains  with  his  fam- 
ily in  1851  to  Utah,  and  moved  to  San 
Bernardino,  Cal.,  in  1854.  He  returned 
to  Utah  when  Johnston's  Army  was  on 
its  way  to  Utah.  Although  not  a  very 
religious  man,  his  property  and  his 
services  were  ever  ready  for  the  de- 
fense of  the  Church.  He  was  the  fa- 
ther of  three  children,  and  when  he 
died  he  left  as  his  descendants  22 
grandchildren  and  49  great-grand- 
children. His  wife  died  in  her  86th 
year.  Bro.  Haskell  died  Nov.  6,  1883, 
in  Benjamin,  Utah. 

HATCH,   Lafayette  Thatcher,   who 

died  while  filling  a  mission  in  a  for- 
eign land,  was  born  April  4,  1899,  in 
Logan,  Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Hezekiah  Eastman  Hatch  and  Geor- 
gia Thatcher.  He  was  baptized  April 
16,  1907,  by  Jacob  Miller,  and  later 
ordained  an  Elder.  When  he  was 
called  to  go  on  a  mission  he  resided 
in  the  Logan  1st  Ward,  Utah.  He 
responded  to  the  call  and  was  set  apart 
June  15,  1923,  to  labor  in  the  Nether- 
lands. After  serving  in  the  ministry 
only  a  few  months  he  died  of  diabetes 
at  a  hospital  in  Apeldoorn,  Holland. 


He  was  an  earnest  missionary,  well 
liked  by  his  associates.  His  remains 
were  sent  to  his  home  in  Logan,  in 
charge  of  Elder  Leon  C.  Walton,  who 
was  released  for  this  purpose.  He  ar- 
rived July  1,  1923,  at  his  field  of  labor, 
and  was  assigned  to  the  city  of  Rot- 
terdam, but  later  was  transferred  to 
Apeldoorn.  At  the  time  of  his  death 
he  was  twenty-four  years  old. 

HATCH,  Orrin,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  C,  was 
born  May  9,  1830,  in  Farmersville, 
Cattaraugus  Co.,  New  York,  a  son  of 
Ira  Stearns  Hatch  and  Weltha  Brad- 
ford. In  1843  the  family  moved  to 
Illinois,  where  Orrin,  then  in  his  14th 
year,  was  baptized.  He  enlisted  with 
the  Battalion  in  July,  1846,  marched 
to  California,  remained  there  until 
gold  was  discovered  in  1848,  and  after 
passing  through  a  severe  illness  he 
came  to  Great  Salt  Lake  City  in  1848. 
Later  in  the  same  year  he  went  to 
Council  Bluffs  for  his  father's  family, 
and  returned  to  Utah  in  1849.  He  set- 
tled in  Bountiful,  and  although  he 
pioneered  Fort  Supply,  Fort  Hall,  Car- 
son Valley  and  Arizona,  his  permanent 
home  was  in  Bountiful.  He  married 
Elizabeth  Perry  in  1855,  and  Maria 
Thompson  in  1856,  and  was  the  father 
of  21  children.  He  was  ordained  a 
Patriarch  in  1901,  and  died  Sept.  8, 
1906,  at  Woods  Cross,  Utah. 

HENRIE,  Daniel,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  D,  was 
born  Nov.  15,  1825,  in  Hamilton  Coun- 
ty, Ohio,  a  son  of  William  Henrie  and 
Myra  Mayall,  both  natives  of  Virginia. 
His  parents  joined  the  Church  in  1842, 
and  moved  to  Nauvoo,  where  Daniel 
was  baptized.  He  marched  to  Califor- 
nia with  the  Mormon  Battalion,  and 
made  his  way  to  Utah  in  1849.  On  Oct, 
29,  1849,  he  married  Amanda  Brad- 
ley, and  settled  in  Davis  County.  While 
on  a  visit  to  Manti  he  was  detained 
by  Indian  troubles  and  later  served 
in  the  Walker  and  Black  Hawk  Indian 


746 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


wars,  and  was  also  captain  of  Company 
A  of  the  Nauvoo  Legion.  He  served  as 
sheriff  one  year  and  as  city  treasurer 
for  three  years,  besides  holding  many 
prominent  positions  in  the  Church, 
acting  as  senior  president  of  the  45th 
quorum  of  Seventy  for  nearly  forty 
years.  By  his  first  wife  he  had  four- 
teen children,  and  by  his  second  wife 
twelve  children.  He  died  June  28,  1914, 
in  Manti,  Utah. 

HIGGINS,  Nelson,  captain  of  Com- 
pany D  of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was 


born  Sept.  1,  1806,  at  Milford,  Otsego 
Co.,  N.  Y.  (See  Bio.  Ency.,  Vol.  3, 
p.  647.) 

HINCKLEY,  Arza  Erastus,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Com- 
pany B,  was  born  Aug.  15,  1827,  in 
Leeds  County,  Canada,  a  son  of  Na- 
thaniel Hinckley  and  Lois  Judd.  He 
was  baptized  in  1838,  by  Lyman  Stod- 
dard, in  Illinois,  en  route  to  Missouri. 
Bro.  Hinckley  migrated  with  the  saints 
to  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  and  while  there 
worked  on  the  erection  of  the  Temple. 
After  the  exodus  from  Nauvoo  in  the 
spring  of  1846,  and  after  his  arrival 
on  the  Missouri  River,  he  enlisted  in 


the  Mormon  Battalion  and,  having 
wintered  at  Pueblo  with  the  sick  de- 
tachment of  the  Battalion,  he  arrived 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  July  29, 
1847,  five  days  after  Pres.  Brigham 
Young.  Elder  Hinckley  resided  in 
Salt  Lake  Valley  seventeen  years, 
after  which  he  became  one  of  the  pio- 
neers of  Summit  County,  where  he  was 
elected  probate  judge  in  1868.  He  was 
active  in  the  construction  of  the  Union 
Pacific  Railroad  through  Utah,  having 
charge  of  some, of  the  contracts.  From 
1882  to  1884  he  filled  a  mission  to  Ari- 
zona, and,  upon  his  return,  located 
at  Rexburg,  Idaho,  whei-e  he  was  or- 
dained a  Patriarch  in  August,  1887. 
He  died  at  Rexburg  Feb.  18,  1901. 

HOLMES,  Jonathan  H.,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company 
D,  was  born  March  11,  1806,  in  George- 
town, Essex  Co.,  Mass.,  was  baptized 
by  John  F.  Boynton  in  1832,  and  came 
to  Kirtland,  Ohio,  in  1834.  There  he 
made  his  home  with  the  Prophet  Jo- 
seph Smith.  On  April  13,  1837,  he 
married  Miss  Rosetta  Carter,  at  the 
home  of  the  Prophet  Joseph.  Wilford 
Woodruff  married  Miss  Phoebe  W. 
Carter  at  the  same  time.  Bro.  Holmes 
remained  with  the  saints  until  their 
expulsion  from  Nauvoo,  and  while  on 
his  way  to  the  Rocky  Mountains  he 
enlisted  with  the  Mormon  Battalion 
and  served  through  the  campaign.  He 
joined  his  family  in  the  mountains 
(Utah)  after  his  discharge,  and  be- 
came a  resident  of  Farmington.  He 
served  as  a  member  of  the  Davis  Stake 
High  Council  at  the  time  of  his  death 
Aug.  18,  1880. 

HORNSBY,  Ellen,  a  lady  mission- 
ary who  died  while  on  a  mission,  was 
born  April  1,  1903,  in  Perth  Amboy, 
Middlesex  Co.,  New  Jersey,  a  daugh- 
ter of  Joseph  Y.  Hornsby  and  Kath- 
ryn  Agnes  Free.  She  was  baptized 
May  11,  1911,  by  G.  Albin  Schelin. 
She  was  residing  in  Ogden,  Weber  Co., 
Utah,  when  called  to  perform  a  mis- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


747 


sion  in  the  Hawaiian  Islands.  She 
accepted  the  call,  being  set  apart  Aug. 
30,  1927.  After  serving  in  her  ap- 
pointed field  a  short  time  she  was 
transferred  to  the  California  Mission, 
arriving  there  Dec.  13,  1927,  where  she 
labored  in  the  San  Jose  district.  After 
performing  a  short  ministry  there  it 
was  found  necessary  for  her  to  un- 
dergo an  opei'ation  for  appendicitis, 
and  she  was  recovering  when  stricken 
with  pneumonia  from  the  effects  of 
which  she  died  May  11,  1928,  in  Cali- 
fornia. Her  death  was  deeply  regret- 
ted, for  she  was  a  very  capable  mis- 
sionary, a  friend,  a  companion,  and  a 
faithful  worker  in  the  cause. 

HUDMAN,  Orson  W.,  Bishop  of  the 
Coltman  Ward,  Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Ida- 
ho, from  1916  to  1921,  was  born  June 
16,  1868,  at  Slaterville,  Utah,  the  son 
of  John  Hudman  and  Emma  Manning. 
He  was  baptized  about  1879,  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  May  4,  1913,  by 
Hyrum  M.  Smith,  and  ordained  a  Bish- 
op Feb.  15,  1916,  by  Orson  F.  Whitney. 

HUDSON,  Wilford,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  A,  was 
born  Sept.  19,  1818,  in  Harrison  Coun- 
ty, Indiana,  and  joined  the  Church  in 
December,  1842,  being  baptized  by 
David  Evans.  In  1844  he  located  with 
the  saints  in  Hancock  County,  and  went 
west  in  the  exodus  of  the  saints  in  1846, 
assisting  in  locating  Mount  Pisgah  in 
Iowa.  He  enlisted  in  the  Mormon  Bat- 
talion in  July,  1846,  at  Council  Bluffs, 
where  he  left  a  sick  family,  and  march- 
ed all  the  way  to  California.  After 
the  Battalion  was  discharged  in  July, 
1847,  Bro.  Hudson  and  others  march- 
ed via  the  Sacramento  Valley  and  Sut- 
ter's Fort  to  Truckee  River,  where 
they  were  met  by  an  express  from 
Pres.  Brigham  Young,  advising  all 
who  could  not  bring  one  year's  pro- 
visions with  them  to  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  to  remain  in  California  and 
work  until  the  following  spring.  Most 
of  the  company  went  back  and  hired 


out  to  Captain  John  A.  Sutter,  Elder 
Hudson  and  Sidney  S.  Willis  taking 
a  contract  for  the  company  to  dig  a 
mill-race  some  distance  up  the  Ameri- 
can River,  a  tributary  of  the  Sacra- 
mento. Gold  was  discovered  and  Bro. 
Hudson  and  others  immediately  start- 
ed up  the  canyon  and  found  consider- 
able of  it;  one  piece,  worth  about 
$5,  was  dug  out  with  a  pen  knife  by 
Bro.  Hudson.  Elder  Hudson  worked 
three  weeks  in  the  mine  and  got  out 
$1,700  worth  of  gold.  The  following 
June  he  left  for  the  "Valley,"  and  ar- 
rived Sept.  23,  1848.  After  a  few 
days  rest,  he  started  for  Council 
Bluffs,  and  brought  his  family  to  Utah 
in  the  spring  of  1849.  He  became  one 
of  the  early  settlers  of  Grantsville. 

HUNT,  Jefferson,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion  and  captain  of 
Company  A,  was  born  Jan.  20,  1803, 
in  Bracken  County,  Kentucky,  a  son 
of  John  Hunt  and  Martha  Jenkins. 
He  moved  with  his  parents  to  Illinois, 


where  he  met  and  married  Celia 
Mounts  in  1823.  They  embraced  the 
"Mormon"  faith  in  1834,  and  later 
joined  the  "Mormons"  in  Clay  County, 
Mo.,  and  were  di-iven  from  there  to 


748 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


Caldwell  County  where  they  shared  in 
the  persecutions  of  the  saints  at  that 
place.  During  the  Illinois  troubles 
Jefferson  Hunt  served  as  a  major  in 
the  Nauvoo  Legion.  When  the  call 
was  made  for  the  Mormons  to  enlist 
for  service  against  Mexico,  he  joined 
the  Battalion  and  was  chosen  captain 
of  the  first  company.  His  eldest  two 
sons  also  enlisted  in  the  Battalion,  his 
son  Marshall  being  the  youngest  mem- 
ber (seventeen  years  old).  The  Hunt 
family  accompanied  the  Battalion  as 
far  as  Santa  Fe.  After  making  the 
march  to  California,  Captain  Hunt  and 
son  Marshall  reached  Salt  Lake  Valley 
in  October,  1847.  That  fall  Captain 
Hunt  went  to  California  with  his  sons' 
and  fifteen  others  to  obtain  provisions, 
cattle,  seeds  and  grain.  They  took 
the  southern  route,  reaching  what  is 
now  San  Bernardino,  on  Christmas 
day,  1847.  With  two  hundred  head  of 
cattle,  seeds,  etc.,  they  returned  to  Salt 
Lake,  reaching  the  "Valley"  in  May, 
1848.  In  the  spring  of  1849  he  helped 
to  settle  Provo,  remaining  there  until 
1851,  wh«n  he  was  called  to  go  to 
California  with  Elder  Amasa  M.  Ly- 
man and  Chas.  C.  Rich,  to  establish 
the  settlement  of  San  Bernardino.  He 
lived  there  until  1857,  when  he  was 
called  back  to  Utah  on  account  of  the 
Johnston  Army  troubles.  Captain  Hunt 
served  as  a  member  of  the  first  legis- 
lature of  California  and  erected  the 
first  sawmill  in  San  Bernardino  Coun- 
ty. After  his  return  to  Utah  he  lived 
in  Ogden  Valley,  Huntsville  being 
named  in  his  honor.  He  also  lived  in 
Oxford,  Idaho,  where  he  died  May  11, 
1879. 

HUNTER,  Jesse  D.,  captain  of  Com- 
pany B  of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was 
born  in  1804  in  Kentucky.  Little  is 
known  of  his  life  previous  to  his  be- 
coming a  member  of  the  Church.  He 
is  mentioned  among  the  prisoners  ar- 
raigned before  Judge  Austin  A.  King 
at  Richmond,  Missouri,  in  connection 
with  Joseph   Smith,  and  was,   there- 


fore, active  during  the  stirring  mob 
scenes  enacted  against  the  Blormons 
in  that  state.  He  removed  to  Nauvoo, 
Illinois,  and  served  as  a  major  of  the 
Nauvoo  Legion.  He  joined  the  "Mor- 
mon" exodus  from  Nauvoo  to  Council 
Bluffs,  where  he  accepted  service  with 
the  Battalion.  He  was  accompanied 
in  the  march  to  the  coast  by  his  wife, 
who  is  spoken  of  as  a  most  "estimable 
lady,"  and  who  died  at  San  Diego  April 
27,  1847,  leaving  a  babe  a  few  weeks 
old.  Captain  Hunter  never  came  to 
Utah,  but  remained  in  California  and 
was  appointed  Indian  agent  at  San 
Luis  Rey.  During  the  gold  excitement 
of  1848  he  went  to  the  mines,  but 
shoi'tly  returned  south  to  accept  again 
an  appointment  as  Indian  Agent  in  the 
district  where  he  had  previously  op- 
erated. He  died  in  Los  Angeles  in 
1882,  at  the  age  of  seventy-three,  leav- 
ing seven  grown  children  with  fam- 
ilies. 

HUNTER,  Lydia,  wife  of  Captain 
Jesse  D.  Hunter  of  Company  B,  went 
with  her  husband  to  California,  and 
died  there  at  San  Diego  April  27,  1847, 
leaving  one  son,  James.  She  was 
spoken  of  as  a  most  estimable  lady. 
Her  son  James  died  in  Los  Angeles 
in  1910. 

HUNTINGTON,  Dimick  B.,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company 
D,  was  born  May  26,  1808,  at  Water- 
town,  Jefferson  Co.,  New  York,  and 
was  best  known  among  the  earlier  set- 
tlers of  Utah  as  an  Indian  interpreter, 
and  for  his  influence  among  the  In- 
dians. He  was  also  connected  with 
earlier  musical  organizations,  notably 
the  martial  band,  in  which  he  acted 
as  the  drum  major;  was  one  of  the 
first  settlers  of  Provo.  After  the  mas- 
sacre of  Capt.  Gunnison  and  party  by 
Indians  on  the  Sevier  River  in  1853, 
Mr.  Huntington  was  sent  to  recover 
their  papers  and  property  and  to  bury 
their  remains,  which  he  accomplished 
successfully.    In  1868  he  was  promi- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


749 


nent  at  the  famous  conference  between 
Indians  and  white  officials  and  settlers, 
at  which  a  treaty  of  peace  was  enter- 
ed into,  terminating  the  Black  Hawk 
war.  He  died  in  Salt  Lake  City  Feb. 
1,  1879. 

IVINS,  Antoine  Ridgway,  one  of  the 

First  Seven  Presidents  of  Seventies, 
was  born  May  11,  1881,  at  St.  George, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  An- 


thony Woodward  Ivins  and  Elizabeth 
Ashby  Snow.  Being  instructed  from 
early  childhood  in  the  principles  of 
faith  and  repentance,  the  boy  was  bap- 
tized in  the  St.  George  Temple  Sept. 
24,  1889,  by  Walter  Granger,  and  con- 
firmed by  David  H.  Cannon.  In  due 
time  he  was  ordained  a  Deacon  and, 
having  moved  to  Mexico  with  his  par- 
ents, he  was  ordained  a  Teacher  in 
Colonia  Juarez,  Mexico.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  by  his  father  in  Salt 
Lake  City  Oct.  10,  1901,  and  a  Sev- 
enty Dec.  28,  1914,  by  Fred  E.  Bar- 
ker. Bro.  Ivins  received  his  endow- 
ments in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  Oct. 
10,  1901,  and  on  June  26,  1912,  in  that 
holy  house,  was  united  in  marriage  to 
Vilate  Ellen  Romney,  daughter  of  Or- 
son D.   Romney  and   Emma   Phillips. 


On  Aug.  5,  1931,  Bro.  Ivins  was  set 
apart  by  Pres,  Heber  J.  Grant  to  pre- 
side over  the  Mexican  Mission,  suc- 
ceeding Elder  Rey  L.  Pratt,  deceased, 
in  that  position.  Having  spent  several 
years  in  Mexico  he  is  highly  trained 
in  the  Castilian  tongue  and  is  endear- 
ed to  the  Mexican  people,  in  whose 
behalf  his  father,  Pres.  Anthony  W. 
Ivins,  labored  with  so  much  fidelity. 
On  Oct.  8,  1931,  in  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple, Bro.  Ivins  was  set  apart  as  a 
member  of  the  First  Council  of  Sev- 
enties by  Pres.  Heber  J.  Grant,  assist- 
ed by  Pres.  Anthony  W.  Ivins. 

JACKSON,  Warren  Oswell,  Bishop 
of  the  Ogden  9th  Ward,  Mt.  Ogden 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1923  to  1930 -|-, 
was  born  Sept.  13,  1887,  in  Ogden, 
Utah,  a  son  of  William  Jackson  and 
Harriet  J.  Hall.  He  was  baptized  Sept. 


13,  1895;  was  oi'dained  to  different 
offices  in  the  Priesthood;  married 
Lillie  M.  Moyes  June  14,  1911,  and 
they  have  five  children.  He  was  or- 
dained an  Elder  and  filled  a  mission 
to  the  Northern  States  in  1919-1921, 
laboring  as  mission  secretary  most  of 
the  time.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  in  1921  by  Stephen  L.  Rich- 
ards, and  set  apart  as  second  coun- 
selor   in   the    Ogden   9th   Ward.     On 


{ 


760 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


April  15,  1923,  he  was  ordained  a 
Bishop  by  Stephen  L.  Richards.  He 
acted  as  president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
for  one  year,  and  as  Sunday  School 
superintendent  for  nine  years. 

JAMESON,  Charles,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  E, 
was  born  April  9,  1803,  at  Little  York, 
Pennsylvania,  a  son  of  David  Jame- 
son and  Magdaline  Miller.  He  was 
baptized  April  6,  1834,  by  David 
Evans,  in  Ohio,  was  in  the  Haun's  Mill 
Massacre  and  was  badly  wounded, 
marched  to  California  with  the  Bat- 
talion, and  came  to  the  Valley  in  1847. 
He  came  from  Iowa  and  settled  in 
Provo  in  1850;  moved  to  Minersville  in 
1871,  where  he  resided  until  his  death 
Sept.  20,  1886,  leaving  one  wife  and 
seven  children. 

JOHNSON,  Henry  Mitchell,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Com- 
pany A,  was  born  July  12,  1821,  in 
Dearborn,  Dearborn  Co.,  Indiana,  a 
son  of  Cornelius  Johnson  and  Nancy 
Johnson.  He  emigrated  with  his  moth- 
er  to    Jackson    County,    Missouri,    in 

1832,  was  baptized  in  the  summer  of 

1833,  and  in  November  of  the  same 
year  was  driven  with  his  mother  from 
Jackson  County,  being  forced  to  travel 
bare-footed  over  the  frozen  prairie.  In 
1848  he  was  again  exiled,  and  while 
on  this  journey  westward,  he  enlisted 
in  the  Mormon  Battalion  and  marched 
to  California.  He  arrived  in  Utah  Oct. 
24,  1848.  In  the  spring  of  1849  he  was 
ordained  an  Elder,  and  in  September, 
1850,  he  married  Louisa  Frances 
Clark.  Bro.  Johnson  was  a  minute 
man  in  all  the  Indian  wars,  was  a  lieu- 
tenant in  the  "Life  Guards,"  and  in 
April,  1856,  he  was  called  on  a  mis- 
sion to  Carson  Valley,  and  got  as  far 
as  Ogden,  when  he  was  taken  sick. 
He  returned  to  Salt  Lake  City  and  died 
March  20,  1857. 

KARREN,  Thomas,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  E,  was 


born  May  1,  1810,  on  the  Isle  of  Man, 
a  son  of  Thomas  Karren  and  Cather- 
ine Clark.  He  moved  to  Liverpool  in 
1830,  and  joined  the  Church  in  May, 
1842.  He  was  ordained  an  Elder  in 
Liverpool,  emigrated  to  Nauvoo,  Illi- 
nois, in  1844,  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
by  Jacob  Gates  in  1844,  and  became 
a  member  of  20th  Quorum  of  Seven- 
ty at  Nauvoo.  He  joined  the  Mormon 
Battalion  in  1846,  spent  the  winter  of 
1846-1847  at  Pueblo,  and  arrived  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  July  29,  1847, 
soon  after  the  original  Pioneers  came. 
He  went  back  to  Council  Bluffs  and 
returned  with  his  family  in  1850  to  the 
"Valley."  In  1852  he  was  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Sandwich  Islands,  where 
he  was  associated  with  Geo.  Q.  Can- 
non and  others.  He  returned  to  Lehi 
in  1855,  and  later  was  chosen  as  first 
counselor  to  Bishop  David  Evans, 
which  position  he  held  until  his  death 
which  occurred  April  12,  1876.  Bro. 
Karren  was  a  faithful  Latter-day 
Saint  and  was  esteemed  by  all  who 
knew  him. 

LANGSTON,  Charles  J.,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  March  24,  1895,  in  Rockville, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Ja- 
cob H.  Langston  and  Alice  M.  Hall. 
He  was  baptized  March  24,  1903,  by 
his  father,  and  afterwards  ordained 
a  Seventy.  He  resided  in  Lynndyl, 
Millard  Co.,  Utah,  when  he  was  called 
to  the  Tongan  Mission,  being  set  apart 
Dec.  13,  1916.  He  spent  almost  two 
years  in  this  field  of  labor,  bearing 
his  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  gos- 
pel, when  he  was  stricken  with  the 
Spanish  influenza  from  the  effects  of 
which  he  died  Nov.  26,  1918,  in  Tonga. 

LARSON,  Thurston,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  C, 
was  born  Oct.  11,  1830,  in  Norway,  and 
resided  in  Nauvoo  when  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  was  killed.  He  joined 
the  Battalion  and  marched  to  Santa 
Fe  with  the  sick  detachment  of  the 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


751 


Battalion,  and  arrived  in  the  Valley 
July  27,  1847,  He  took  part  in  the 
Echo  Canyon  war  and  suffered  all  the 
trials  incident  to  early  days  in  Utah. 
He  married  Elizabeth  Fox  Dec.  10, 
1859,  bore  a  strong  testimony  in  a 
Priesthood  meeting  held  at  Preston, 
Idaho,  Aug.  7,  1897,  and  died  March 
11,   1907,  in   Parker,  Idaho. 


birthday.  He  was  a  young  man  of 
high  qualities  of  character  and  of 
sterling  integrity,  and  gave  faithful 
service  in  the  mission  field. 

LEATHAM,     Louis     Salisbury,     a 

member  of  the  Salt  Lake  Stake  Gene- 
alogical Temple  Committee,  was  born 
Nov.  16,  1903,  in  the  16th  Ward,  Salt 


LAUCHLIN,  David  S.,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  D, 
was  born  April  28, 1816,  in  New  Hamp- 
shire. He  joined  the  Church  at  an 
early  day  in  Kirtland,  Ohio,  and  after- 
wards moved  to  Far  West,  Missouri, 
where  he  suffered  persecution,  togeth- 
er with  the  rest  of  the  saints.  He 
afterwards  located  in  Nauvoo,  and  was 
with  the  saints  when  they  were  driven 
from  that  place  in  1846.  On  the  jour- 
ney westward  he  enlisted  in  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion,  and  after  his  return  to 
Winter  Quarters  in  the  fall  of  1847 
he  filled  a  mission  to  Ohio  and  settled 
in  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  with  his 
family  in  1852.  Later  he  located  in 
Cedar  Valley,  Utah,  where  he  died 
Dec.  5,  1856,  after  a  long  illness,  being 
only  forty  years  old.  He  left  a  widow 
and  four  children  and  was  a  highly 
respected  man. 

LAYTON,  Vernon  Cecil,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Feb.  12,  1896,  in  Kaysville,  Davis 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Christopher  Lay- 
ton,  jun.,  and  Jane  Elizabeth  Bodily. 
He  was  baptized  when  eight  years  old 
by  William  Blood,  and  later  ordained 
an  Elder.  Elder  Layton  was  set  apart 
for  a  mission  to  California  by  Elder 
J.  Golden  Kimball  May  27,  1919.  After 
laboring  in  Arizona  for  twenty-one 
months  he  was  taken  sick  with  kidney 
trouble,  from  which  he  died  Feb.  8, 
1921,  at  San  Diego,  while  en  route 
from  Arizona  to  San  Francisco.  His 
bi'other,  who  was  at  his  bedside  when 
he  died,  brought  the  body  home  to 
Kaysville,  where  services  were  held 
in  the  tabernacle  on  his  twenty-fifth 


Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Patriarch 
Wm.  Leatham  and  Martha  Ann  Sal- 
isbury. His  grandparents  were  early 
residents  of  Utah  and  his  maternal 
grandfather,  Joshua  Salisbury  was,  it 
is  claimed,  the  pioneer  of  dry  land 
farming  in  Utah  and  the  West.  Bro. 
Louis  Leatham  was  baptized  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Tabernacle  font  by  Elder 
George  A.  Davis  Feb.  4,  1911,  and 
received  his  education  in  the  public 
schools  of  Salt  Lake  City  and  in  the 
extension  division  of  the  University 
of  Utah.  He  was  ordained  to  offices 
in  the  Aaronic  Priesthood  and  ordain- 
ed an  Elder  May  25,  1925,  by  Bishop 
LeGrand  P.  Backman.  He  was  ordain- 
ed a  Seventy  Aug.  31,  1927,  by  Ru- 
lon  S.  Wells,  just  prior  to  leaving  on 
a  mission  to  Great  Britain.  During 
this  mission  he  traveled  from  the  ex- 
treme north  of  Scotland  to  the  Eng- 


752 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


lish  border  on  his  bicycle,  preaching 
the  gospel,  and  also  acted  for  some 
time  as  president  of  the  Aberdeen 
Branch  and  as  clerk  of  the  Sheffield 
District.  Before  returning  home  in 
October,  1929,  he  traveled  quite  ex- 
tensively in  Europe.  He  is  a  mem- 
ber of  the  2nd  Quorum  of  Seventy 
and  is  also  deeply  interested  in  gene- 
alogical and  temple  work,  is  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Salt  Lake  Stake  Genealogical  and 
Temple  Committee,  and  vice  president 
and  secretary  of  the  Robert  Leatham 
Family  Association.  He  has  also 
served  in  various  capacities  in  the 
auxiliary  organizations  of  the  Church. 
In  secular  affairs  he  has  sei-ved  as  au- 
ditor for  the  Bennett  Gas  and  Oil  Com- 
pany, cashier  of  the  National  Build- 
ing and  Loan  Assn.  of  America  and 
its  affiliated  companies,  auditor  for 
the  State  Banking  Department  (liq- 
uidating division),  and  field  represen- 
tative for  the  Home  Owners  Loan  Cor- 
poration. He  was  one  of  the  division 
supervisors  of  the  first  Covered  Wag- 
on Days  Parade  held  in  Salt  Lake  City 
in  July,  1931,  and  in  subsequent  annual 
parades,  and  is  a  member  of  the  State 
Central  Committee  of  one  of  the  major 
political  parties  of  Utah.  On  Sept. 
24,  1930,  he  married  Anna  Grace 
Cam  (daughter  of  Thomas  Richard 
Carn  and  Almeda  Ford)  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  They  have  two  children, 
namely,  William  Wallace  and  Janet 
Leatham. 

LEMON,  James  William,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  A, 
was  born  May  16,  1827,  in  Corydon, 
Indiana,  a  son  of  Washington  Lemon 
and  Tamar  Stephens,  one  of  twelve 
children,  eight  sons  and  four  daugh- 
ters. He  joined  the  Church  when  a 
boy  and  identified  himself  with  the 
saints  who  were  fleeing  from  Nauvoo 
in  1846,  enlisted  with  the  Battalion 
and  marched  to  California.  He  came 
to  Utah,  pioneered  several  places  and 
finally  jcettled  in  Weston,  Idaho,  where 


he  died  April  14,  1908,  at  the  age  of 
81  years. 

LEWIS,  Samuel,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  C,  was 
born  Oct.  27,  1829,  in  Simpson  County, 
Kentucky,  a  son  of  Tarlton  Lewis  and 
Melinda  Gimlen.  He  was  baptized  by 
David  Evans  in  Caldwell  County,  Mis- 
souri, in  1837,  came  with  the  Pioneers 
from  Nauvoo  to  Mount  Pisgah  in  1846, 
and  enlisted  in  the  Battalion  at  Coun- 
cil Bluffs  July  16,  1846.  After  serving 
a  year  he  was  discharged  at  Los  An- 
geles July  16,  1847,  and  arrived  in  the 
"Valley"  in  December,  1847.  He  be- 
came a  resident  of  Great  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  in  the  spring  of  1848  went 
with  the  first  mail  to  Pres.  Young  after 
this  leader  left  the  "Valley"  in  1847. 
He  worked  on  the  Nauvoo  Temple  un- 
til the  walls  were  completed,  on  the 
St.  George  Temple  about  18  months, 
on  the  Salt  Lake  Temple  14  months, 
and  on  the  Manti  Temple  four  months, 
being  a  stone  cutter  by  trade.  He  went 
to  Parowan  in  1851  and  acted  as  first 
counselor  to  his  father  (Bishop  Tarle- 
ton  Lewis)  in  Parowan,  went  to  Ari- 
zona in  1880,  and  was  one  of  the  first 
settlers  in  Pima.  He  helped  to  build 
John  W.  Young's  factory  at  Moan  Cop- 
py,  located  at  Thatcher,  Arizona,  about 
1888  or  1889,  and  died  in  Phoenix,  Ari- 
zona, August  31,  1911. 

MANTLE,  John  Wiilard,  an  Elder 
in  the  Church  who  died  while  filling 
a  mission,  was  born  July  24,  1854,  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Llewel- 
lyn Mantle  and  Catherine  Watkins.  He 
was  baptized  when  eight  years  old  and 
later  ordained  to  the  different  grades 
of  the  Priesthood.  As  a  resident  of 
Taylorsville,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah,  he 
was  called  on  a  mission  to  the  East- 
ern States  Mission,  being  set  apart 
Sept.  29,  1903.  While  in  the  ministry 
he  labored  faithfully,  taking  hold  of 
missionary  labor  with  a  zeal  that 
made  him  an  efficient  messenger  of 
the  gospel.    He  becam.e  ill  and  under- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


763 


went  an  operation.  He  died  Nov.  25, 
1904,  in  Baltimore,  Maryland.  His 
remains  were  brought  home  by  Elder 
Wilford  M.  Allred,  and  were  buried 
in  Taylorsville,  Utah,  Dec.  4,  1904. 

MAXWELL,  William  Baley,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Com- 
pany D,  was  born  March  14,  1821,  in 
Illinois.  He  was  baptized  about  1845 
in  Nauvoo,  and  was  among  the  most 
valiant  in  the  midst  of  fatigues,  sacri- 
fices and  hardships  of  the  Battalion  ex- 
perience. In  the  Utah  troubles  of  1857- 
1858,  he  was  in  the  front  rank  for  de- 
fense of  the  rights  of  the  Latter-day 
Saints.  From  1856  to  1859  he  was  as- 
sociated with  the  colonization  and 
presidency  of  Santaquin  in  Utah 
County,  and  from  that  time  on  he 
spent  his  life  in  the  south  with  pioneer- 
ing and  colonization  labors.  In  1887 
he  was  in  La  Ascension,  Chihuahua, 
Mexico,  where  the  saints  were  making 
a  settlement  named  Colonia  Diaz.  Bro. 
Maxwell  was  an  efficient  Indian  mis- 
sionary and  always  sustained  a  good 
influence  with  the  natives.  He  went  to 
Mesa,  Arizona,  from  Graham  County, 
for  his  health,  and  died  at  Mesa  Aug. 
18,  1895. 

MEAD,  Orlando  Fish,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  C, 
was  born  Jan.  10, 1823,  in  Wilton,  Fair- 
field County,  Conn.,  a  son  of  Geo.  Mead 
and  Hannah  Whitlock.  He  was  bap- 
tized by  Charles  W.  Wandell  in  New 
Canaan,  Conn.,  in  January,  1839,  came 
to  Nauvoo  in  1841,  was  ordained  an 
Elder  and  afterwards  a  Seventy,  came 
west  in  1846,  and  enlisted  in  the  Bat- 
talion at  Council  Bluffs;  arrived  in  the 
"Valley"  in  1849,  after  working  for 
some  time  on  the  Mormon  Island,  near 
Sacramento,  and  worked  as  a  shoe- 
maker for  John  A.  Sutter.  After  his 
arrival  in  the  "Valley"  he  located  in 
Cottonwood,  and  later  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  and  went  south  at  the  time  of  the 
"Move."  After  his  marriage  in  1853, 
he  lived  in  Spanish  Fork  for  21  years. 


He    located   at   Price,    Utah,   in    1885 
where  he  died  Feb.  26,  1897. 

MERRILL,  Philemon  C„  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  and  3rd 
lieutenant  in  Company  B,  was  bom 
Nov.  12,  1820,  in  Byron,  Genesee  Co., 
N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Samuel  Merrill  and 
Phoebe  Odell.  He  was  baptized  in 
March,  1839,  near  Carthage,  111.,  by 
Joel  H.  Johnson,  was  ordained  an  Elder 
by  Patriarch  Hyrum  Smith  Jan.  2, 
1840;  filled  a  mission  to  Wisconsin  with 
Stephen  Markham  in  1840-1841,  joined 
the  Nauvoo  Legion  in  the  spring  of 
1841,  was  ordained  a  Seventy  in  1843, 
worked  on  the  Temple,  and  in  1845 
was  one  of  Capt.  Alpheus  Haws'  com- 
pany of  fifty  to  prepare  to  emigrate, 
and  on  Feb,  6,  1846,  was  one  of  the 
guard  under  Hosea  Stout  to  cross  the 
Mississippi  River;  they  camped  7  miles 
from  the  river  on  Sugar  Creek.  He 
returned  to  Nauvoo  for  his  family, 
and  on  his  return  halted  at  Council 
Bluffs,  where  he  enlisted  in  the  Bat- 
talion, with  his  brothers-in-law.  Phi- 
lander Colton,  Thomas  A.  Williams 
and  Clark  Stillman.  These  brethren 
left  their  wives  and  children  and  took 
up  the  march  to  Fort  Leavenworth. 
Philemon  was  elected  second  lieuten- 
ant in  Company  B,  and  when  the  Bat- 
talion arrived  at  Santa  Fe  he  was  cho- 
sen adjutant  of  the  Battalion,  and 
marched  to  California.  After  his  dis- 
charge, July  16,  1847,  he  made  his  way 
to  the  "Valley"  with  Capt.  Jefferson 
Hunt  and  seven  others,  arriving  in  the 
Valley  Oct.  11,  1847,  where  he  found 
his  father  and  mother  and  two  sisters. 
He  went  on  to  Winter  Quarters  for  his 
family,  and  returned  to  the  mountains 
Oct.  16,  1849.  Later  he  kept  a  ferry 
on  Green  River  and  in  1851  went  back 
to  the  States  and  brought  forty-four 
wagons  with  goods  back  for  Thomas 
S.  Williams.  He  filled  a  mission  to 
Europe  in  1853-1856,  lived  in  Salt  Lake 
City,  served  as  a  colonel  in  the  Echo 
Canyon  campaign,  moved  south  to 
Provo,  and  later  settled  in  Farming- 


Vol.  IV.  No.  48 


November  28,   1936 


764 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ton;  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of 
Morgan  County;  was  called  to  Soda 
Springs,  Idaho,  to  take  charge  of  the 
branch  there,  organized  the  saints  at 
Georgetown,  Idaho,  as  a  branch; 
thence  he  moved  to  Bennington,  and 
in  1876  was  called  to  the  southern 
country,  settling  in  Arizona.  He  was 
afterwards  ordained  a  Patriarch  in  the 
St.  Joseph  Stake,  Arizona.  He  died 
Sept.  15,  1904,  at  Thatcher,  Ariz. 

MERRILL  (Thompson),  Phoebe  Lo- 
dema,  who  accompanied  the  Mormon 
Battalion  as  a  nurse,  was  born  Aug.  5, 
1832,  in  Elba,  New  York,  a  daughter 
of  Samuel  and  Phoebe  Merrill.  As  a 
child,  she  was  with  her  pai'ents  during 
the  exodus  from  Nauvoo,  and  went 
with  the  Battalion  as  a  nui'se  in  the 
company  in  which  her  brother,  Phile- 
mon C.  Merrill,  served  as  adjutant. 
From  Santa  Fe  she  was  sent  with  the 
sick  detachment  and  the  women  and 
children  to  Pueblo,  where  they  spent 
the  winter  of  1846-1847.  She  married 
Parmenio  A.  Jackman  in  1851,  who 
was  killed  by  the  Indians  in  1860;  she 
later  married  a  man  by  the  name  of 
Thompson.  She  died  Jan.  18,  1909,  in 
Parker,  Idaho. 

MILES,  Gertrude  Griffiths,  a  lady 
missionary  who  died  in  the  field,  was 
born  Aug.  31,  1895,  in  Smithfield, 
Cache  Co.,  Utah,  a  daughter  of  Wil- 
liam George  Griffiths  and  Gertrude 
Martha  Williams.  She  was  baptized 
Sept.  5,  1903,  by  John  Swenson.  Her 
mother  died  when  Gertrude  was  only  a 
girl  of  thirteen,  and  the  bringing  up  of 
the  other  children  of  the  family  was 
left  to  her.  In  1912,  she  married 
Glen  Miles  in  the  Logan  Temple  and 
their  married  life  was  very  happy. 
He  was  killed  in  one  of  the  battles  of 
the  World  war  in  October,  1918.  After 
his  death  Sister  Miles  devoted  most  of 
her  time  to  Church  work.  While  still 
residing  in  Smithfield  she  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Northern  States, 
being   set  apart   Oct.   19,   1920.     She 


reached  her  field  of  labor  Oct.  23,  1920, 
and  died  in  Chicago  March  25,  1921, 
the  cause  of  her  death  being  embol- 
ism following  an  attack  of  quinsy. 
She  was  a  woman  of  pleasing  person- 
ality, and  by  the  service  she  rendered 
to  others,  won  a  place  in  the  hearts 
of  all  who  were  associated  with  her. 
She  was  chosen  to  assist  Sister  Emily 
Whitney  Smith,  president  of  the  mis- 
sion Relief  Societies,  in  special  work, 
which  called  them  to  visit  many 
branches  of  the  mission,  giving  encour- 
agement and  suggestions  to  the  local 
sisters.  On  Friday  evening,  March 
18,  1921,  a  social  was  given  in  the 
Logan  Square  chapel,  commemorating 
the  seventy-ninth  anniversary  of  the 
organization  of  the  Relief  Society.  At 
this  social  Sister  Miles  gave  a  histor- 
ical sketch  of  the  work  accomplished 
by  the  women  since  their  o  #jauizaLion 
was  effected.  Funei'al  services  were 
held  in  the  Logan  Square  chapel,  Chi- 
cago, Saturday  afternoon,  where  a 
large  number  of  friends  and  investi- 
gators assembled  to  show  their  appre- 
ciation of  their  association  with  her. 
Many  were  the  words  of  praise  of 
the  untiring  efforts  and  the  sterling 
qualities  of  Sister  Miles.  Elder  R. 
Truman  Hillyard,  president  of  the 
Northern  Indiana  Conference,  a  resi- 
dent of  Smithfield,  Utah,  a  life  long 
friend  of  Sister  Miles,  accompanied 
her  body  home.  Her  mission  was  com- 
plete in  this  life,  and  pleasant  thoughts 
can  be  entertained  of  the  joyous  meet- 
ing on  the  "other  shore"  of  the  hero, 
who  gave  his  life  for  humanity,  and 
the  heroine,  who  died  "on  the  firing 
line,"  battling  for  the  cause  of  truth 
and  righteousness. 

MILES,  Samuel,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  B,  was 
born  April  8,  1826,  in  Attica,  Genesee 
Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Samuel  Miles  and 
Prudence  Marks.  He  was  baptized  in 
April,  1836,  by  Salmon  Warner,  while 
traveling  with  the  saints  to  Missouri. 
Bro.  Miles  was  present  at  the  laying 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


755 


of  the  corner-stone  of  the  Temple  at 
Far  West,  July  4,  1838,  and  remem- 
bered the  acts  of  mob  violence  in  dev- 
astating the  saints'  fields,  destroying 
their  stock,  abusing  aged  men  and 
women,  and  the  subsequent  expulsion 
of  the  saints  from  the  state.  He  join- 
ed the  Battalion,  and  the  hardships  of 
the  long  march  of  two  thousand  miles, 
the  manifest  interposition  of  Provi- 
dence in  delivering  them  from  armed 
foes,  and  the  numerous  vicissitudes  in- 
cident to  a  march  through  a  wild  and 
often  desert  country,  formed  a  notable 
year  in  the  life  of  Elder  Miller.  He 
arrived  in  the  "Valley"  in  1848;  was 
married  in  1849,  ordained  a  Seventy 
Jan.  18,  1851,  filled  a  mission  to  Cal- 
ifornia in  1857,  and  another  mission  to 
settle  Dixie  in  1862.  He  was  ordained 
a  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  a  High 
Councilor  at  St.  George  Aug.  18,  1857, 
moved  to  Heberville  (later  called 
Price),  and  died  May  22,  1910,  at  St. 
George,  Utah. 

MILLER,  Daniel  Morgan,  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company 
E,  was  born  Nov.  19,  1821,  in  Orleans 
County,  New  York,  a  son  of  Josiah 
Miller  and  Amanda  Morgan.  His  par- 
ents were  baptized  into  the  Church  in 
1831,  and  moved  to  Kirtland,  Ohio, 
where  they  resided  until  the  saints 
migrated  west.  Bro.  Miller  was  bap- 
tized July  16,  1846,  at  Council  Bluffs 
by  Elder  A.  Love,  and  ordained  an 
Elder  by  Pres.  Brigham  Young  and 
Geo.  A.  Smith.  The  same  day  he 
joined  Company  E,  of  the  Mormon 
Battalion  and  traveled  with  it  to  San- 
ta Fe.  He  was  taken  sick  and  could 
not  proceed,  but  his  brother  Miles  left 
him  and  went  with  the  Battalion  to 
California.  Bro.  Daniel,  after  spend- 
ing the  winter  of  1846-1847  at  Pueblo 
was  able  to  travel  with  Capt.  Brown's 
company  to  Salt  Lake  Valley,  arriv- 
ing there  soon  after  the  Pioneers.  He 
resided  in  Salt  Lake  City  until  1852, 
when  he  moved  to  Nephi,  Juab  Co., 
where   he   remained   until  his  'death. 


He  was  killed  by  the  Indians  while 
returning  from  a  canyon  with  a  load 
of  wood  Sept.  26,  1872,  near  Spring 
City,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah. 

MILLER,  Miles,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  E,  was 
born  July  26,  1818,  at  Clarendon,  Or- 
leans Co.,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Josiah  Miller 
and  Amanda  Morgan.  He  marched  to 
California  with  the  Battalion,  and 
when  he  came  back  settled  in  Ferron, 
Emery  Co.  He  married  Rachel  Ewing, 
and  nine  children  were  born  to  them. 
He  died  March  2,  1900,  at  Nephi,  Juab 
Co.,  Utah. 

MOSS,  David,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  A,  was 
born  Sept.  17,  1818,  in  Newton,  York- 
shire, England,  a  son  of  Robert  Moss 
and  Margaret  Kelsall.  He  was  bap- 
tized Jan.  6,  1838,  by  Joseph  Fielding, 
near  Preston,  England,  labored  for  two 
years  as  a  local  Elder  and  emigrated 
to  America  on  the  ship  "Yorkshire"  in 
1843.  After  his  arrival  at  Nauvoo,  he 
worked  on  the  Temple,  was  ordained 
a  Seventy  in  1845,  and  filled  a  mission 
to  Indiana  with  Peter  Melling  (the 
first  Patriarch  in  England,  who  died 
with  fever  and  ague  near  Logansport, 
Indiana).  Elder  Moss  crossed  the  Mis- 
sissippi River  Feb.  9,  1846,  with  Hosea 
Stout's  company,  traveled  through 
Iowa  to  Council  Bluffs,  marched  with 
the  Battalion  to  California,  and  was 
discharged  one  year  later  (July  16, 
1847).  After  remaining  one  year  in 
California,  he  arrived  in  the  Valley 
in  1848.  He  settled  in  Bountiful,  and 
later  in  Salt  Lake  City;  was  married 
Jan.  17,  1852,  and  was  called  to  the 
Southern  Mission  in  1861,  being  one  of 
the  founders  of  St.  George,  Utah. 

MOWREY,  Harley,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  C,  was 
born  Aug.  9,  1822,  in  Rhode  Island,  a 
son  of  Barton  Mowrey  and  Ruth  Walk- 
up.     He  became  a  convert  to  "Mor- 


756 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


monism"  at  an  early  day  and  came 
west  during  the  general  exodus  from 
Nauvoo,  Illinois,  in  1846.  He  enlisted 
in  the  Mormon  Battalion  in  July,  1846, 
was  sent  with  the  sick  detachment 
from  Santa  Fe,  to  Pueblo  and  came  to 
the  "Valley"  July  29,  1847.  On  the 
journey  (on  July  4,  1847)  he  married 
Martha  Jane  Sharp,  the  widow  of  Nor- 
man Sharp,  a  member  of  the  Battalion, 
who  died  in  September,  1846.  She 
bore  her  second  husband  (Mowrey) 
nine  children,  having  a  daughter 
(Sarah  Ellen)  by  her  first  husband. 
Bro.  Mowrey  was  a  stone-mason  by 
avocation,  and  lived  in  different  places. 
The  last  few  years  of  his  life  he  spent 
at  Vernal,  where  he  died  Oct.  21,  1920, 
aged  98  years. 

MOYES,  Ralph  E.,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  mission,  was  born 
Feb.  1,  1906,  in  Escalante,  Garfield 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  J.  E.  Moyes  and 
Minnie  Wilcox.  He  was  baptized  in 
1915,  by  W.  N.  Roundy,  and  later  or- 
dained an  Elder.  Elder  Moyes  ac- 
cepted a  call  to  fill  a  mission  in  the 
Northern  States,  being  set  apart  Oct. 
18,  1927.  When  he  arrived  in  his  field 
of  labor  he  was  assigned  to  work  in 
the  Wisconsin  Conference,  and  had 
served  in  the  ministry  eight  months 
when  he  was  stricken  with  tonsilitis 
from  the  effects  of  which  he  died 
June  25,  1928,  in  the  Marquette  hos- 
pital, in  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.  His 
body  was  shipped  home  to  Escalante, 
the  remains  being  accompanied  by 
Pres.  Noah  S.  Pond.  A  short  and  im- 
pressive service  was  held  at  the  Lat- 
ter-day Saints  chapel  before  leaving 
Milwaukee,  Wednesday  evening,  June 
27,  1928.  Funeral  services  were  also 
held  at  Escalante  July  1,  1928.  Elder 
Moyes  left  a  widow,  Mrs.  Golda  Moyes. 

MOYLE,  Henry  Dinwoodey,  presi- 
dent of  the  Cottonwood  Stake,  Utah, 
since  1927,  was  born  April  22,  1889, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  the  son  of 
James  H.  Moyle  and  Alice  Dinwoodey. 


He  was  baptized  July  3,  1897,  by  Jo- 
seph S.  Wells,  received  a  good  educa- 
tion and  was  an  earnest  student  from 
his  early  youth.  Taking  an  active 
part  in  Chui'ch  affairs,  he  was  or- 
dained to  the  Aaronic  Priesthood  when 
quite  young  and  was  active  among 
the  boys  doing  the  work  pertaining 
to  offices  in  said  Priesthood.  He  was 
ordained  an  Elder  June  21,  1909,  by 
James  H.  Moyle  and  filled  a  mission 
to  Switzerland  and  Germany  in  1909- 
1912.  In  1915  he  completed  the  study 
of  law  at  Harvard  University  and  was 
appointed  U.  S.  Attorney  for  Utah  in 
1920.  Since  1915  he  has  delivered 
lectures  on  law  to  the  students  at  the 
University  of  Utah.  When  the  World 
war  broke  out  he  enlisted  as  a  private 
but  soon  was  advanced  to  the  position 
of  captain  of  infantry  and  served  in 
the  21st  Infantry  in  the  U.  S.  Army. 
After  the  war,  he  again  became  active 
in  Church  matters  and  on  Feb.  21, 
1927,  he  was  ordained  a  High  Priest 
by  Apostle  Melvin  J.  Ballard,  after 
which  he  acted  as  a  high  councilor  in 
the  Cottonwood  Stake  until  Nov.  21, 
1927,  when  he  was  set  apart  as  presi- 
dent of  the  Cottonwood  Stake,  suc- 
ceeding Uriah  G.  Miller.  In  1920 
(July  26th)  Bro.  Moyle  married  Clara 
Alberta  Wright  (daughter  of  Charles 
H.  Wright  and  Clara  Scoville,  born 
July  24,  1893,  in  Ogden,  Utah)  in  the 
Salt  Lake  Temple,  which  union  has 
been  blessed  with  six  children,  name- 
ly, Alice  (born  July  26,  1920),  Maria 
(born  Jan.  22,  1922),  James  H.  (born 
Jan.  25,  1923),  Virginia  (born  Jan. 
10,  1926),  Janet  (born  June  17,  1928), 
and  Henry  D.  Moyle,  jun.,  (born  Dec. 
24,  1929).  Pres.  Moyle's  present  occu- 
pation is  practicing  attorney  at  law. 

MUIR,  William  Smith,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  A, 
was  born  July  19,  1822,  at  Bannock- 
burn,  Sterling,  Scotland,  a  son  of 
Stephen  Muir  and  Elizabeth  Black- 
wood. He  was  baptized  in  Scotland 
Jan.  17,  1842,  by  Robert  Menzes,  and 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


757 


emigrated  to  America  in  1844,  locating 
at  Nauvoo.  He  enlisted  in  the  Mormon 
Battalion,  marched  to  California  serv- 
ing as  a  private,  corporal  and  sergeant, 
went  to  San  Francisco  after  being  dis- 
charged, worked  at  the  mines,  passed 
through  Great  Salt  Lake  Valley  in  1848 
on  his  way  to  Winter  Quarters,  where 
he  found  his  family,  whom  he  had  left 
in  Nauvoo.  He  brought  them  to  the 
Valley  in  1849,  and  located  in  Bounti- 
ful. He  filled  a  mission  to  England  in 
1855-1858,  having  been  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty in  Nauvoo  in  1844.  Bro.  Muir  died 
Nov.  27, 1897,  at  West  Bountiful,  Utah. 

NAEGLE,  John  Conrad,  a  member 
of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  A, 
was  born  Sept.  14,  1825,  in  Alber- 
schweiler,  Bavaria,  a  son  of  Henry 
Naegle  and  Otilla  Wissing.  After  his 
arrival  in  America  he  changed  his 
name  to  Nail,  and  is  so  named  on  the 
roster  of  the  Battalion.  In  later  life  he 
was  known  as  Naegle.  He  joined  the 
Church  in  Bavaria,  and  as  the  only  one 
of  his  family  emigrated  to  America, 
arriving  in  Nauvoo  in  1844,  just  after 
the  death  of  the  Prophet.  He  was 
exiled  with  the  other  saints  and  was 
one  of  the  youngest  men  to  join  the 
Mormon  Battalion.  He  re-enlisted  in 
the  Battalion  for  six  months  and  re- 
mained in  California  until  1856,  when 
he  came  to  Utah  and  settled  in  Lehi. 
From  May,  1873,  to  July,  1874,  he  filled 
a  mission  to  Germany.  Later  he  moved 
to  Sonora,  Mexico,  where  he  died  Sept. 
10,  1899. 

NELSON,  Irvin  Theodore,  second 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the  Cot- 
tonwood Stake,  Utah,  since  1929,  was 
born  April  17,  1892,  in  Milton,  Morgan 
Co.,  Utah,  the  son  of  Waldemar  Theo- 
dore Nelson  and  Mary  Jensen.  He  was 
raised  in  Morgan  County,  attended 
public  schools  in  Milton,  and  later  the 
Weber  Academy  at  Ogden,  from 
which  institution  he  graduated  in  1912, 
after  taking  the  normal  course.  While 
there,  he  edited  the  school  paper,  the 


"Acorn,"  took  part  in  student  body 
activities,  and  was  class  valedictorian. 
After  that,  he  taught  in  the  Morgan 
High  School  two  years,  served  as  a 
member  of  the  Ogden  Stake  Sun- 
day School  Board  in  1910-1912,  as  a 
member  of  the  Morgan  Stake  Sunday 
School  Board  in  1912-1914  and  1916- 

1919,  and  as  a  member  of  the  Cache 
Stake  M.  I.  A.  Board  in  1914-1916.  He 
also  studied  at  the  Agricultural  Col- 
lege in  Logan,  where  he  participated 
in  Inter-College  debates,  edited  the 
"Buzzer"  (school  year  book),  and  was 
elected  to  the  National  Honorary  Scho- 
lastic Fraternity,  graduating  from  the 
institution  with  a  B.  S.  degree  in  1916, 
In  1917  (Sept,  21),  he  married  Kath- 
leen Bagley  in  the  Salt  Lake  Temple, 
The  issue  of  this  marriage  is  five  chil- 
dren viz:  Irvin  Theodore,  jun.,  Kathleen 
Joy,  Lila  Gay,  Waldemar  Rene  and 
Andrew  Thomas.  Bro.  Nelson  was  bap- 
tized Sept.  4,  1900,  by  Wm.  Giles,  or- 
dained a  Deacon  Aug.  23, 1903,  a  Priest 
Dec.  27,  1908,  and  a  Seventy  Dec.  1, 
1912,  by  Brigham  H.  Roberts.  He  filled 
a  mission  to  the  Eastern  States  in  1919- 

1920,  laboring  principally  in  Boston 
and  New  York,  presiding  over  the 
Massachusetts  Conference,  later  over 
the  Brooklyn  Conference,  and  still  la- 
ter served  as  mission  secretary,  work- 
ing under  Pres.  George  W.  McCxine. 
After  returning  home  he  taught  in  the 
seminary  at  Brigham  City;  later  he 
acted  as  superintendent  of  the  Agri- 
cultural Farm  at  Cedar  City  (a  branch 
of  the  A.  C.  of  Logan).  In  the  Paro- 
wan  Stake  he  acted  as  head  of  scout 
work;  later  was  scout  commissioner 
for  Zion's  National  Park  Council  B. 
S.  A.  In  1925  he  became  a  resident 
of  Brinton  Ward  (now  Cottonwood), 
Cottonwood  Stake,  where  he  acted  as 
ward  scout  master,  and  was  engaged 
as  office  manager  of  the  Utah  Radio 
Products  Company.  He  was  ordained 
an  High  Priest  and  set  apart  as  Bish- 
op of  the  Cottonwood  Ward  by  Orson 
F.  Whitney  Feb.  20,  1928,  having  been 
called  to  that  oosition  on  Christmas 


768 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


day,  1927.  At  a  Cottonwood  Stake 
quarterly  Conference  in  November, 
1929,  he  was  called  to  the  office  of  sec- 
ond counselor  to  Henry  D.  Moyle  in  the 
stake  presidency  and  was  set  apart  to 
that  office  the  same  day  by  James  E. 
Talmage.  In  1936  Elder  Nelson  was 
selected  by  the  First  Presidency  to  go 
to  Omaha  and  act  as  supervisory  land- 
scape architect  for  the  improvements 
being  made  on  the  Mormon  Pioneer 
cemetery  in  connection  with  the  erec- 
tion of  the  monument  at  Winter  Quar- 
ters. The  work  done  was  a  distinct 
credit  to  the  Church  and  a  fitting  me- 
morial to  the  6,000  pioneers  who  lost 
their  lives  en  route  to  the  valleys  of 
the  mountains. 

NICHOLLS,     Samuel     Frederick, 

Bishop  of  the  McKinley  Ward,  Grant 
Stake,  Utah,  from  1924  to  1931,  was 
born  Sept.  9,  1894,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
a  son  of  Frederick  Wm.  Nicholls  and 


Anna  Johnson.  Having  been  born  of 
goodly  parents  he  was  baptized  Sept. 
27,  1902,  by  Oscar  F.  Hunter  and  or- 
dained successively  to  offices  in  the 
Priesthood  as  follows:  ordained  a  Dea- 
con Nov.  28,  1905,  by  John  M.  Whita- 
ker;  a  Teacher  Jan.  25,  1909,  by  Chas. 
F.  Longson;  a  Priest  Nov.  5,  1911,  by 
Stephen  H.  Harrow;  an  Elder  March 


29,  1914,  by  Thos.  C.  Nuttal;  a  Seven- 
ty July  14,  1920,  by  Seymour  B.  Young 
and  a  High  Priest  June  20,  1922,  by 
Frank  Y.  Taylor.  He  served  as  presi- 
dent of  a  Deacons'  quorum,  president 
of  a  Teachers'  quorum,  president  of 
an  Elders'  quorum  and  as  a  counselor 
in  the  Emerson  Ward  bishopric  two 
years.  In  1914-1916  he  filled  a  mis- 
sion to  Great  Britain,  laboring  prin- 
cipally in  the  Manchester  conference. 
During  the  World  war  he  served  in 
the  A.  E.  F.  from  1917  to  1919,  and 
after  returning  home  in  1920,  he  mar- 
ried Ethelyn  Walker,  daughter  of 
Samuel  D.  Walker  and  Henrietta  Ar- 
nold. This  marriage  has  been  blessed 
with  three  children,  namely,  Thelma 
La  Rue,  Samuel  F.,  jun.,  and  Richard 
W.  In  1923  Bro.  Nicholls  moved  to 
Farmers  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City,  and 
on  Aug.  1,  1924,  was  ordained  a  Bish- 
op and  set  apart  to  preside  in  that  ca- 
pacity over  the  McKinley  Ward  (for- 
merly a  part  of  the  Farmers  Ward) 
by  Apostle  George  Albert  Smith.  This 
position  he  held  until  1931  when  he 
was  set  apart  as  a  member  of  the 
Grant  Stake  High  Council,  serving  in 
that  capacity  for  two  and  one-half 
years,  when  he  moved  from  the  stake. 
While  serving  as  Bishop  of  the  Mc- 
Kinley Ward  he  was  also  chairman 
of  the  Boy  Scout  Court  of  Honor, 
Grant  district,  for  seven  years.  In 
a  civil  capacity  Bishop  Nichols  acted 
as  special  auditor  for  Salt  Lake  Coun- 
ty for  18  months  and  in  November, 
1929,  was  elected  to  serve  a  four-year 
term  as  auditor  for  Salt  Lake  City. 
He  was  re-elected  in  November,  1933, 
for  another  four-year  term. 

OAKLEY,  James,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  D,  was 
born  Sept.  5, 1826,  near  Brooklyn,  Long 
Island,  N.  Y.,  a  son  of  Ezra  Oakley  and 
Elizabeth  DeGroot.  He  moved  with 
his  parents  to  Nauvoo,  Illinois,  in  1842, 
joined  the  Church  when  sixteen  years 
old,  being  baptized  in  the  spring  of 
1843.     He  remained  in  Nauvoo  until 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


759 


the  exodus  in  1846,  joined  the  Mormon 
Battalion  at  Council  Bluffs,  but  fell  ill 
and  went  to  Pueblo,  under  Capt.  James 
Brown.  He  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in  1847,  went  to  California  in 
1849  with  the  gold  rush,  but  returned 
to  Utah  in  1851,  locating  in  Spring- 
ville.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the 
Indian  wars  of  early  Utah  history  and 
in  all  things  he  lived  the  life  of  the 
hardy,  courageous  pioneer  and  empire 
builder.  He  died  in  Springville,  Utah, 
April  30,  1915.  It  was  said  of  him  that 
he  had  such  a  horror  of  debt  that  he 
never  owed  a  dollar  in  his  life  to  any- 
body. 

OBORN,    Clement    A.,    one    of   the 

Elders  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  May  15,  1900,  in  Og- 
den,  Weber  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Heber 
C.  Oborn  and  Emily  Millgate.  He  was 
baptized  June  28,  1908,  by  his  father 
and  later  ordained  an  Elder.  He  was 
residing  in  Ogden  when  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  the  Tongan  Islands, 
being  set  apart  Nov.  l6,  1920.  After 
serving  some  months  in  the  ministry 
he  was  stricken  with  typhoid  fever 
from  the  effects  of  which  he  died  May 
11,  1922.  His  funeral  and  burial  were 
held  at  Haapai  of  the  Tongan  group, 
after  every  effort  had  been  made  to 
carry  out  the  wishes  of  the  mission- 
ary's parents,  to  have  his  body  brought 
home.  It  seemed,  however,  that  neith- 
er regulations  nor  facilities  on  the 
islands  would  permit  this. 

OTT,  Joseph  Alma,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  Dec.  12,  1871,  in  Duncan, 
Washington  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  David 
B.  Ott  and  Hannah  Normington.  He 
was  baptized  when  about  eight  years 
old,  and  resided  in  Tropic,  Garfield 
Co.,  Utah,  when  he  was  called  on  his 
mission.  He  responded  to  the  call  and 
was  set  apart  Nov.  8,  1895,  to  labor 
in  the  Swiss  and  German  Mission,  but 
after  being  engaged  in  the  ministry 
H  few  months  he  was  stricken  with 


the  black  diphtheria  from  which  he 
died  Jan.  18,  1896,  in  Dresden,  where 
he  was  buried. 

PACE,  James,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  E,  was 
born  June  15,  1811,  at  Murfreesboro, 
Rutherford  Co.,  Tenn.,  a  son  of  James 
Pace  and  Mary  Ann  Loving.  Becom- 
ing a  convert  to  "Mormonism",  he  was 
baptized  April  14,  1839,  by  Dominicus 
Carter.  He  was  ordained  a  Seventy 
Oct.  6,  1840,  passed  through  much  per- 
secution with  the  saints,  and  while  a 
resident  of  Nauvoo  acted  as  a  member 
of  the  Prophet  Joseph  Smith's  life 
guard.  In  1846  he  participated  in  the 
exodus  from  Nauvoo,  and  on  his  ar- 
rival at  Council  Bluffs  he  enlisted  in 
the  Mormon  Battalion  and  marched 
with  that  body  as  first  lieutenant  in 
Company  E  to  California.  After  his 
discharge  he  made  his  way  to  Salt 
Lake  Valley,  where  he  married  Ann 
Webb  Dec.  4,  1854,  by  whom  he  was 
the  father  of  several  children.  For 
some  time  he  resided  in  Springville, 
Utah  Co.,  moved  to  Washington  Coun- 
ty in  1861,  and  later  to  Arizona,  where 
he  became  a  resident  of  Thatcher  and 
died  there  April  6,  1888. 

PECK,  Edwin  Martin,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  D, 
was  born  July  24,  1828,  in  Caledonia 
County,  Vermont,  a  son  of  Martin  H. 
Peck  and  Susan  Cluff,  His  father's 
family  moved  to  Nauvoo,  and  after  the 
saints  were  exiled  from  their  homes 
there  in  1846,  he  traveled  with  the  body 
of  the  Church  to  Council  Bluffs,  Iowa, 
where  he  joined  the  Battalion  in  July, 

1846.  After  his  arrival  in  California 
he  was  honorably  discharged  July  16, 

1847,  but  four  days  later  with  forty- 
six  other  members  of  the  Battalion 
re-enlisted  for  service  six  months  lon- 
ger. After  his  discharge  he  came  to 
the  "Valley"  and  made  his  home  in 
Provo.  He  died  in  Goshen,  Utah  Co., 
Aug.  22,  1903. 


760 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


PECK,  Thorit,  a  member  of  the  Mor- 
mon Battalion,  Company  C,  was  born 
May  30,  1826,  in  Lock,  Cayuga  Co., 
New  York,  a  son  of  Warren  and  Han- 
nah Peck.  He  emigrated  with  his 
mother  to  Jackson  County,  Mo.,  in  the 
fall  of  1833,  and  a  few  weeks  later  the 
saints  were  driven  out  by  mobs.  Thor- 
it was  baptized  as  a  boy  and  moved 
with  the  saints  from  Missouri  to  Illi- 
nois, and  while  on  the  journey  from 
Nauvoo  westward  in  1846  he  enlisted 
in  the  famous  Battalion,  and  marched 
to  California,  enduring  all  the  fatigue 
and  hardships  of  that  long,  wearisome 
journey.  He  arrived  in  Great  Salt  Lake 
Valley  in  1848  and  was  ordained  a  Sev- 
enty May  10, 1857,  becoming  a  member 
of  the  34th  quorum  of  Seventy.  He  was 
one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Pleasant 
Grove,  Utah  Co.,  where  he  resided  until 
his  death,  which  occurred  there  Feb. 
6,  1858,  he  being  only  32  years  of  age. 
He  left  a  wife  and  three  children,  and 
died  as  a  faithful  member  of  the 
Church. 

PEERY,  Joseph  Stras,  president  of 
the  Temple  Square  Mission  and  man- 


ager of  the  Bureau  of  Information  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  was  born  Oct.  5,  1868, 


in  Ogden,  Utah,  a  son  of  David  H. 
Peery,  and  Elizabeth  L.  Higginboth- 
am.  His  father  died  in  Ogden  in  1901 
but  his  mother  who  was  born  in  Nau- 
voo, 111.,  Jan.  13,  1846,  is  still  (1936) 
living  in  Ogden,  aged  91  years. 

Joseph  S.  Peery  was  born  under 
very  favorable  circumstances,  and  his 
youth  was  spent  in  attending  school 
and  studying  music  and  singing  and 
activity  in  Church  organizations.  When 
a  young  boy  his  father  would  call  him 
into  their  home,  known  as  "The  Vir- 
ginia" and  have  him  play  the  piano 
and  repeat  stories  from  the  Bible  for 
the  entertainment  of  visitors.  From 
the  age  of  16  to  20  he  worked  in  his 
father's  store  and  made  a  splendid 
clerk;  often  working  from  7:00  o'clock 
a.  m.  to  10:00  p.  m.  At  the  age  of 
20  Joseph  Peery  desired  to  continue 
his  education  and  having  spent  two 
winters  at  the  University  of  Utah,  his 
parents  arranged  for  him  to  attend 
the  Roanoke  College  in  Virginia.  At 
that  time  there  was  great  persecution 
against  the  saints  and  a  local  news- 
paper was  very  abusive.  Bro.  Peery 
discovered  that  one  of  his  college  pro- 
fessors was  editor  of  the  paper  so  he 
said  to  him:  "You  are  telling  lies 
against  my  people,  and  if  you  don't 
stop,  I  will  leave  Roanoke  College  and 
everyone  will  know  why  I  leave."  The 
professor  answered:  "Why,  Mr.  Peery, 
I  had  no  idea  that  you  were  a  'Mor- 
mon.' I  promise  you  that  I  will  never 
say  anything  against  your  people  any 
more."  The  winters  of  1888-1889  and 
1889-1890  Bro.  Peery  spent  at  the  Uni- 
versity of  Nebraska,  at  Lincoln,  where 
he  became  president  of  his  class,  edi- 
tor of  the  college  paper,  represented 
his  university  in  a  debate  with  the 
Methodist  University,  and  represented 
the  University  infantry  company  in  a 
rifle  shooting  contest.  After  his  return 
from  college  in  1890,  Elder  Peery  was 
appointed  superintendent  of  the  We- 
ber County  Schools,  during  which  time 
he  inaugurated  a  system  of  grading, 
the  first  of  the  kind  adopted  for  coun- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


761 


ty  schools  in  Utah.  In  the  summer  of 
1892  he  resigned  this  position  to  attend 
the  Yale  University  Law  Department, 
at  New  Haven,  Conn.,  where  he  gradu- 
ated with  honors  in  the  class  of  1895 
with  the  degree  of  L.  L.  B.  The  eve- 
ning he  arrived  in  New  Haven  there 
was  a  large  gathering  of  students  who 
were  debating  the  gold  and  silver 
standards.  All  the  students  were 
strongly  on  the  side  of  gold.  The  state- 
ment was  made,  "Is  there  anyone  in 
the  audience  who  would  like  to  talk?" 
Bro.  Peery  rose  and  for  fifteen  min- 
utes held  the  students  spellbound  in 
his  defense  of  free  silver.  The  next 
day  he  was  invited  to  join  an  honorary 
society  called  Corbey  Court.  He  ac- 
cepted and  made  many  friends  among 
the  Yale  students. 

After  his  return  home  Bro.  Peery 
saw  the  importance  of  having  a  public 
library  in  Ogden.  He  got  up  an  en- 
tertainment, which  was  attended  by 
1,500  people  and  netted  $500  which 
amount  was  the  nucleus  of  the  Og- 
den public  library.  In  1898  he  was 
elected  the  first  president  of  the  Car- 
negie Public  Library  of  Ogden  and 
during  his  administration  the  library 
building  was  erected.  On  May  4, 
1896,  he  was  appointed  a  trustee  of 
the  State  Industrial  School  and  was 
later  made  president  of  the  Board  of 
Trustees.  In  the  fall  of  1898  he  was 
nominated  by  the  Democratic  party 
and  elected  to  be  county  attorney,  in 
which  office  he  served  for  two  years 
and  then  went  into  the  sheep  busi- 
ness, from  which  he  retired  in  1929. 

On  July  20,  1898,  he  married  Lua- 
cine  Hoge  of  Salt  Lake  City,  daughter 
of  Enos  D.  Hoge  and  Luacine  Williams. 
For  the  first  three  years  their  mar- 
riage was  ideal,  but  his  wife's  health 
failing,  he  watched  her  for  seven 
years  gradually  losing  strength.  After 
her  demise  on  April  27,  1908,  he  felt 
that  "Heaven  would  not  be  heaven  to 
him  without  his  wife,"  so  in  August, 
1908,  he  went  into  the  Salt  Lake  Tem- 
ple and  had  his  wife  sealed  to  him 


for  time  and  all  eternity.  He  says, 
"The  main  testimony  of  my  life  was 
the  heavenly  happiness  I  received  in 
the  holy  Temple  of  the  Lord  when  my 
adorable  wife  was  sealed  to  me."  Bro. 
Peery  then  made  temple  work  his  main 
business  for  some  years.  He  accumu- 
lated a  genealogy  of  thousands  of 
names  and  as  far  as  possible  had  the 
work  done  in  their  behalf. 

On  Dec.  22,  1909,  Bro.  Peery  mar- 
ried Julina  Clarissa  Smith  in  the  Salt 
Lake  Temple.  She  was  a  daughter  of 
Pres.  Joseph  F.  Smith  and  Julina 
Lambson.  Two  sons  and  four  daugh- 
ters were  born  of  this  marriage,  name- 
ly, Joseph  Smith,  David  Harold,  Lua- 
cine, Julina,  Elizabeth  Louise  and 
Margaret  Peery.  On  Aug.  1,  1923,  he 
again  went  through  the  sorrow  of  los- 
ing his  beloved  wife  by  death.  She 
left  six  children  between  the  ages  of 
2  and  12  years.  On  March  19,  1924, 
he  married  Liliu  Davis,  second  cousin 
of  Julina  Smith  Peery,  deceased,  and 
a  daughter  of  Albert  J.  Davis  and  Mar- 
garet D.  Forsythe.  This  union  has 
been  blessed  with  three  children, 
namely,  Nancy,  Paul  Davis  and  Jeanne 
Peery. 

Elder  Peery  has  held  many  respon- 
sible positions  in  the  Church,  such  as 
president  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  officer  on 
Sunday  school  and  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A. 
boards.  High  Councilor,  etc.,  and  in 
August,  1909,  he  became  a  missionary 
guide  on  the  Temple  Block,  Salt  Lake 
City,  in  which  work  he  has  been  ac- 
tive ever  since.  On  July  1,  1929,  he 
was  appointed  first  assistant  to  Pres. 
Levi  Edgar  Young  of  the  Bureau  of 
Information,  and  on  July  9,  1932,  he 
was  appointed  president  of  the  Tem- 
ple Square  Mission  and  manager  of 
the  Bureau  of  Information.  During 
the  year  1936,  under  the  direction  of 
Pres.  Peery,  300,000  tourists  were  en- 
tertained and  67  missionary  guides  al- 
ternated in  taking  companies  through 
the  Tabernacle  and  Assembly  Hall  and 
in  explaining  to  the  visitors  the  sacred 
uses  of  the  Temple. 


762 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


PETERSON,  Albert,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  March  7,  1872,  in  Wittinge, 
Upland,  Sweden,  a  son  of  Olof  Peter- 
son and  Ulrika  Grimfelt.  He  was  bap- 
tized March  9,  1882,  and  emigrated  to 
Utah  in  1891.  He  resided  in  South 
Cottonwood,  Salt  Lake  Co.,  Utah, 
when  he  was  called  on  his  mission. 
Responding  to  the  call  he  was  set 
apart  April  14,  1897,  to  labor  in  the 
Scandinavian  Mission,  but  after  being 
engaged  in  the  ministry  for  a  few 
months  he  was  stricken  with  a  sick- 
ness from  which  he  died  Dec.  30,  1898, 
in  Upsala,  Sweden.  His  remains  were 
shipped  to  Utah  and  buried  in  the 
South  Cottonwood  cemetery  June  11, 
1899. 

RASMUSSEN,  Althen  J.,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  Sept.  16,  1901,  in  Mount 
Pleasant,  Sanpete  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of 
Lars  C.  Rasmussen  and  Cecelia  Jon- 
assen.  He  was  baptized  Sept.  16,  1909, 
by  Anthnel  Carter,  and  later  ordained 
an  Elder.  While  still  residing  in  Mount 
Pleasant  he  was  called  to  go  on  a  mis- 
sion to  the  Tongan  Islands,  being  set 
apart  May  25,  1921.  He  served  some 
months  in  this  ministry  when  he  was 
stricken  with  an  illness  that  caused 
his  death  July  4,  1923,  in  Haapai, 
where  he  was  buried. 

RICHTER,  Fredrick  Emil,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  foreign  mis- 
sion, was  born  Dec.  20,  1858,  in  Bod- 
eretz,  Saxony,  Germany,  a  son  of  Karl 
August  Richter  and  Wilhelmine  Simm- 
ger.  He  was  baptized  June  10,  1903, 
and  later  ordained  a  High  Priest.  He 
emigrated  to  America  and  made  his 
home  in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  When 
called  on  his  mission  he  was  residing 
in  the  Wandamere  Ward,  Gi'ant  Stake, 
in  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  where  he  was 
a  very  active  worker.  He  accepted 
the  call  to  labor  in  the  Swiss  and 
German  Mission,  being  set  apart  July 
27,  1923.     He  had  been  in  the  minis- 


try almost  twelve  months  when  he 
died  Sept.  8,  1924,  of  blood  poisoning 
and  a  weak  heart,  in  Zwickau,  Ger- 
many. He  was  sick  only  a  few  days. 
His  remains  were  brought  home  to 
Salt  Lake  City,  accompanied  by 
Brother  and  Sister  Albert  Frederick, 
who  were  honorably  released  for  this 
purpose. 

ROCKWOOD,  Claude  H.,  an  Elder 
who  died  while  filling  a  mission,  was 
born  March  9,  1907,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Bishop  J.  A.  Rockwood 
and  Mary  Ellen  Hill.  He  was  baptized 
March  27,  1915,  by  Leo  Amundsen, 
and  later  ordained  an  Elder,  and  re- 
sided in  the  Yale  Ward,  Liberty  Stake, 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  when  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  California.  Re- 
sponding to  the  call,  he  was  set  apart 
for  his  missionary  labors  Jan.  31,  1928, 
but  after  being  engaged  in  the  minis- 
try for  a  few  months  he  was  stricken 
with  influenza  and  died  Sept.  20,  1928, 
in  San  Jose,  California.  The  body  of 
Elder  Rockwood  was  brought  home, 
accompanied  by  his  mother  and  the 
presiding  Eder  of  the  San  Jose  confer- 
ence. He  was  twenty-one  years  old, 
and  was  making  fine  progress  in  his 
missionary  work,  acting  as  secretary 
to  Patriai'ch  Geddes  while  the  latter 
was  making  a  tour  of  the  San  Jose 
conference.  He  was  a  graduate  of  the 
Latter-day  Saints  High  School.  All 
mourned  his  passing,  but  rejoiced  in 
the  cause  for  which  he  laid  down  his 
life. 

ROND,  Albertus,  an  Elder  who  died 
in  the  missionary  field,  was  born  Nov. 
24,  1862,  in  Zwolle,  Overysel,  Nether- 
lands, a  son  of  Coenraad  Rond  and 
Egbertdina  Jansen.  He  was  baptized 
May  21,  1899,  in  Amsterdam,  by  Frank 
E.  Hansen,  and  served  as  a  counselor 
in  the  superintendency  of  the  Amster- 
dam Sunday  School,  and  also  as  a 
counselor  in  the  presidency  of  the 
Amsterdam  Branch  No.  1.  He  emi- 
grated to  Utah  in  May,  1909.     While 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


763 


residing  in  Ogden,  Utah,  he  was  or- 
dained a  High  Priest  and  called  on  a 
mission  to  the  Netherlands,  being  set 
apart  Nov.  4,  1921.  He  had  served 
almost  a  year  in  the  ministry  when 
he  suffered  a  heart  attack,  from  which 
he  died  in  Amsterdam  Sept.  15,  1922. 
His  wife,  Hendrika  J.  Rond,  accompa- 
nied him  to  their  native  land  and  was 
with  him  during  his  last  hours.  His 
body  was  brought  back  to  Utah  by 
two  companions,  Elders  Joseph  Van 
Leeuwen  and  Hendrik  Bell,  sen.  Ser- 
vices were  held  for  him  in  the  Ogden 
Tabernacle  Oct.  22,  1922. 

SALISBURY,  Elizabeth  H  o  s  k  i  n  , 

wife  of  Joshua  Salisbury  and  a  pio- 
neer  of    Wellsville,    Utah,   was    born 


Sept.  28,  1829,  in  Cornwall,  England, 
a  daughter  of  James  Hoskin  and  Eliz- 
abeth Hancock.  Her  grandfather,  John 
Hancock,  was  engineer  of  one  of  the 
earliest  locomotives  and  in  1812  drove 
an  engine  over  the  London  Bridge. 
While  Sister  Salisbury  was  still  a 
young  girl,  he  father  died,  and  she  went 
to  work  for  a  wealthy  English  family 
as  a  nurse  girl,  where  she  learned 
many  valuable  lessons  in  house  keeping 
and  the  care  of  children.  She  was  mar- 


ried when  quite  young  to  Benjamin 
Hoskins,  who,  being  ambitious  to  se- 
cure financial  opportunities,  sailed 
from  England  with  his  young  wife  for 
America  Aug.  25,  1848.  They  settled 
first  in  the  State  of  Connecticut  and 
later  moved  to  Pennsylvania,  locating 
in  Minersville,  where  the  young  hus- 
band went  to  work  in  the  coal  mines. 
In  1856  he  was  injured  while  at  his 
work  and  about  a  month  later  died 
from  injuries  sustained.  The  young 
wife  with  her  three  children  were  well 
cared  for  by  the  Odd  Fellows  Lodge, 
and  when,  shortly  afterwards,  twin 
girls  were  born  to  her,  a  nurse  was 
sent  to  attend  her,  and  this  lodge  and 
other  kind  friends  were  solicitous  in 
her  behalf.  Among  these  was  Joshua 
Salisbury,  whose  wife  had  recently 
died,  leaving  him  with  two  little  chil- 
dren. Sympathy  for  each  other's  sor- 
row became  affection  and  on  Oct.  13, 
1858,  they  were  married.  Being  also 
a  convert  to  the  Church  Sister  Salis- 
bury thriftily  helped  to  save  meaP'^ 
to  make  it  possible  for  the  family  tO 
go  to  the  Rocky  Mountains.  The  fam- 
ily included  one  little  daughter,  Caro- 
line, born  eight  months  before  they 
left  their  home  in  the  east.  They  ar- 
rived in  Salt  Lake  City  Sept.  1,  1860. 
The  family  settled  at  Wellsville,  a  re- 
cently settled  locality  in  Cache  Coun- 
ty. Here  Bro.  Salisbury  erected  a  log 
house  and  Sister  Salisbury  became  as- 
sociated with  the  Relief  Society,  over 
which  she  presided  for  eighteen  years. 
She  was  beloved  by  all  her  co-workers. 
She  became  the  mother  of  eight  more 
children  and  also  reared  a  motherless 
babe  for  some  time.  She  mothered  four 
different  families  of  children,  19  in 
all.  Sister  Salisbury  died  in  Salt  Lake 
City  July  19,  1918,  at  the  age  of  89 
years.  Interment  took  place  in  Wells- 
ville. 

SALISBURY,  Joshua,  one  of  the 
early  pioneer  settlers  of  Wellsville, 
Cache  County,  Utah,  was  born  June 
3,  1827,  in  Llanasa,  Flintshire,  Wales, 


764 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


a  son  of  Thomas  Salisbury  and  Sarah 
Jones.  He  was  baptized  Dec.  25,  1852, 
by  his  uncle,  Joseph  Jones,  and  while 
yet  in  his  native  land  was  ordained 
an  Elder  in  1854.  In  appearance  Bro. 
Salisbury  was   tall   and   well  propor- 


tioned, and  at  the  age  of  18  years 
weighed  185  pounds.  In  June,  1850, 
at  Llanasa,  Wales,  he  married  Martha 
Davies  who  bore  him  two  children. 
Being  deeply  impressed  with  the  fur- 
ther light  and  knowledge  received 
from  the  teachings  of  the  restored 
gospel  he  earnestly  endeavoi'ed  to  con- 
vert his  fellow  workers  in  the  coal 
mines,  but  met  with  great  persecution 
as  a  result.  In  1855,  with  his  wife  and 
two  children,  Bro.  Salisbury  left  his 
native  land  for  America.  The  family 
spent  five  years  on  the  frontiers  be- 
fore crossing  the  plains  and  mountains 
from  the  Missouri  River  to  Utah. 
While  passing  through  Illinois  Bro. 
Salisbury's  wife  died  at  St.  Johns, 
Perry  Co.,  111.,  in  1857,  and  on  Oct. 
13,  1858,  he  married  Elizabeth  Hos- 
kin  (daughter  of  James  Hoskin  and 
Elizabeth  Hancock).  Bro.  Salisbury 
worked  in  the  coal  mines  in  Pennsyl- 
vania, and  through  thrift  and  deter- 
minaton  was  finally  enabled  to  accum- 


ulate the  necessary  outfit  and  supplies 
to  unite  with  the  body  of  the  Church 
in  Utah.  With  his  own  hands  he  built 
a  sturdy  covered  wagon  and  traveled 
a  thousand  miles  overland,  alone,  ar- 
riving safely  at  Florence,  Nebraska, 
where  Bro.  Salisbury,  his  wife  and 
their  children  united  with  a  company 
of  emigrating  saints  in  charge  of  Cap- 
tain John  Smith,  which  after  traveling 
another  thousand  miles  arrived  in 
Great  Salt  Lake  City  Saturday,  Sept. 
1,  1860.  The  family  settled  at  Wells- 
ville  in  Cache  Valley,  Utah,  where, 
upon  the  advice  of  Brigham  Young, 
Bro.  Salisbury  became  a  pioneer  in 
dry  farming,  being  the  first  man  in 
Cache  Valley  to  raise  wheat  on  "dry" 
land  there.  He  began  his  dry  farm 
experiments  in  the  year  1868  and  in 
1872  was  successful  in  harvesting  the 
first  crop  of  "dry  land"  wheat  in  the 
Valley.  He  also  raised  choice  garden 
seeds  on  his  irrigated  farm,  some  of 
which  were  exhibited  at  the  World's 
Fair  in  Chicago,  111.,  and  carried  off  a 
number  of  valuable  prizes.  Brother 
Salisbury  was  known  to  be  a  charit- 
able man,  always  helping  the  immi- 
grating saints  and  those  less  fortu- 
nate than  himself.  He  proved  himself 
to  be  a  man  without  guile.  He  was 
an  expert  stone  mason  and  helped 
with  both  his  services  and  his  means 
in  the  erection  of  the  Logan  Temple. 
He  also  helped  in  the  construction  of 
the  Wellsville  Tabernacle  and  many 
other  public  buildings  and  homes  in 
Cache  Valley.  He  was  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Dec.  25,  1884.  Bro.  Salisbury 
died  May  6,  1913,  at  Wellsville,  Utah, 
survived  by  his  widow  and  ten  chil- 
dren. 

SALISBURY,   Matilda  Jane  Gibbs, 

wife  of  Bishop  Joseph  Hoskin  Salis- 
bury, was  born  at  Willard,  Box  Elder 
Co.,  Utah,  Dec.  16,  1863,  daughter  of 
Patriarch  John  Duggan  Gibbs  and 
Julia  Ann  Thompson,  both  early  Utah 
pioneers.  Sister  Salisbury  was  of  a 
most  refined  nature  and  spent  her  life 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


765 


in  the  service  of  the  Church  and  in 
doing  good  among  her  f  ellowmen.  With 
the  exception  of  seven  years,  when 
she  resided  at  Imbler,  Oregon,  where 
her  husband  presided  as  Bishop  of  the 


Imbler  Ward,  her  whole  life  was  spent 
in  Utah.  Sister  Salisbury  began  her 
Church  activities  in  the  Portage  Ward 
prior  to  her  marriage  in  the  Logan 
Temple,  Jan.  1,  1885.  She  subsequent- 
ly became  an  officer  in  the  Wellsville 
M.  I.  A.;  president  of  the  Imbler  Ward 
Relief  Society;  an  officer  in  the  Logan 
2nd  Ward  Y.  W.  M.  I.  A.,  and  presi- 
dent of  the  Logan  5th  Ward  Y.  W. 
M.  I.  A.  While  residing  in  Salt  Lake 
City  she  was  active  in  the  Mill  Creek, 
Forest  Dale  and  20th  Wards  Relief 
Societies,  giving  of  her  sound  judg- 
ment and  mature  wisdom.  With  her 
husband  and  family  she  celebrated  her 
golden  wedding  anniversary  on  Jan. 
1,  1935.  She  was  also  an  active  offi- 
cer of  the  Daughters  of  the  Utah  Pio- 
neers organization.  Exemplifying  the 
words,  "God  could  not  be  everywhere, 
so  He  sent  mothers,"  she  became  the 
honored  mother  of  six  children,  name- 
ly, Joseph  Gibbs,  LeRoy  Gibbs,  Wil- 
ford  Gibbs,  John  Duggan  and  Julia 
Fliy.abeth.  Two  of  her  sons  have  filled 


missions  for  the  Church  and  one  son 
rendered  sei'vice  to  his  country  over- 
seas in  the  U.  S.  army  during  the 
World  war.  Sister  Salisbury  was  truly 
a  fit  candidate  for  the  Celestial  King- 
dom, having  a  life  long  record  of  ser- 
vice and  devotion  to  the  Church  and 
to  the  principles  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ.  She  breathed  a  spirit  of  love 
and  affection  which  inspired  all  with 
whom  she  associated.  Sister  Salis- 
bury, survived  by  her  husband,  three 
sons  and  14  grandchildren  passed  from 
this  world  in  her  72nd  year,  after  a 
life  well  lived  and  full  of  good  deeds, 
on  June  3,  1935,  at  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah.  After  a  most  impressive  funer- 
al in  the  20th  Ward,  Salt  Lake  City, 
interment  took  place  in  Logan,  Utah, 
where  graveside  services  were  also 
held. 

"Loving  and  kind  in  all  her  ways, 
Upright  and  just  to   the  end  of  her 

days, 
Sincere  and  true  in  heart  and  mind. 
Beautiful  memories  she  left  behind." 

SILVER,  Walter  McAllister,  one  of 

the  Elders  who  died  in  the  missionary 
field,  was  born  Nov.  9,  1900,  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  a  son  of  Hyrum  A. 
Silver  and  Mary  McAllister.  He  was 
baptized  June  5, 1909,  and  later  ordain- 
ed an  Elder.  He  was  residing  in  Salt 
Lake  City,  Utah,  when  he  was  called 
to  fill  a  mission  to  the  Southern  States. 
Accepting  the  call  he  was  set  apart  to 
labor  there  Nov.  15,  1921.  He  had 
spent  almost  a  year  in  the  ministry 
when  he  died  in  Hickory,  North  Caro- 
lina, of  septicaemia. 

STELTER,  Carl  Ludwig  Ferdinand, 

one  of  the  Elders  who  died  in  the  mis- 
sionary field,  was  born  in  March,  1870, 
in  Pirbstow-Rugenwalde,  Germany,  a 
son  of  Ferdinand  Stelter  and  Luise 
Helke.  He  was  baptized  and  emigrated 
to  Utah  in  1901,  making  his  home  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  Utah.  While  residing 
there  he  received  a  call  to  fill  a  mission 
in  the  Swiss  and  German  Mission,  be- 


766 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


ing  set  apart  June  16,  1922.  After 
being  in  his  field  of  labor  almost  a  year 
he  was  taken  sick,  and  because  of  his 
ill-health  he  had  been  honorably  re- 
leased from  his  missionary  work  and 
was  preparing  to  I'eturn  home  when  he 
died  April  12,  1923,  of  heart  failure,  in 
Berlin,  Germany.  Elder  Conrad  Dietz 
was  released  to  accompany  the  remains 
home. 

THOMAS,  Kenneth  Albert,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  Aug.  19,  1902,  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  a  son  of  Joseph  Albert  Thomas 
and  Mary  A.  Evans.  He  was  baptized 
Oct.  1,  1910,  by  Joseph  A.  Halvorsen, 
and  was  later  ordained  an  Elder.  He 
was  residing  in  Garfield,  Salt  Lake  Co., 
Utah,  when  he  was  called  to  fill  a  mis- 
sion in  Mexico.  Responding  to  the  call 
of  the  Church  he  was  set  apart  Jan.  9, 
1923.  He  had  been  in  the  ministry  but 
a  short  time  when  he  was  stricken  with 
pneumonia  from  the  effects  of  which  he 
died  Feb.  15,  1923,  in  El  Paso,  Texas. 
His  body  was  accompanied  home  by 
Pres.  Rey  L.  Pratt  of  the  Mexican  Mis- 
sion. During  his  illness  he  manifested 
a  strong  belief  in  prayer.  The  passing 
of  Elder  Thomas  was  keenly  felt,  not 
only  by  his  immediate  associates,  but 
by  the  missionaries  and  saints  through- 
out the  mission.  Services  were  held 
for  him  in  the  34th  Ward  chapel  Feb. 
22,  1923. 

TRIMBLE,  Robinson  Chase,  an  El- 
der who  died  in  the  missionary  field, 
was  born  July  30,  1889,  in  Fillmore, 
Millard  Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  Jefferson 
Chase  Trimble  and  Margret  Fortie.  He 
was  baptized  Aug.  4,  1900,  by  Thomas 
C.  Callister,  and  later  ordained  an  El- 
der. At  the  time  he  was  called  on  his 
mission  to  the  Eastern  States,  he  was 
residing  in  Leamington,  Millard  Co., 
Utah.  After  responding  to  his  call  he 
was  set  apart  for  his  mission  Jan.  24, 
1922.  He  labored  in  the  West  Pennsyl- 
vania Conference,  acting  as  president 
of  the  same.    After  serving  over  eight- 


een months  in  his  field  of  labor,  he  de- 
veloped tuberculosis  which  was  the  ul- 
timate cause  of  his  death,  which  took 
place  in  Pittsburg,  Pennsylvania,  Aug. 
27,  1923. 

TYLER,  Daniel,  author  of  the  His- 
tory of  the  Mormon  Battalion,  was 
born  Nov.  23,  1816,  in  Semproneus, 
Cayuga  Co.,  New  York,  the  son  of 
Andrew  Tyler  and  Elizabeth  Comins. 
He  was  baptized  Jan.  16,  1833,  by 
Lincoln  Hoskins,  ordained  a  High 
Priest  Sept.  24,  1844,  by  Brigham 
Young,  acted  as  3rd  sergeant  in  Com- 
pany C.  of  the  Mormon  Battalion, 
marched  with  the  Battalion  to  Califor- 
nia, and  arrived  in  Salt  Lake  City, 
Utah,  Oct.  16,  1847.  He  was  ordained 
a  Patriarch  Dec.  10,  1873,  by  Brigham 
Young,  and  died  Nov.  7,  1906.  He  was 
one  of  the  first  L.  D.  S.  missionaries 
to  labor  in  Germany  and  Switzerland. 

WANNER,  Serge  N.,  an  Elder  who 
died  while  filling  a  foreign  mission, 
was  born  March  8,  1908,  in  Preston, 
Franklin  Co.,  Idaho,  a  son  of  John 
George  Wanner  and  Regina  Nuffer.  He 
was  baptized  April  29,  1916,  by  J.  W. 
Corbridge,  was  ordained  an  Elder,  and 
resided  at  Preston,  Idaho,  when  he  was 
called  on  a  mission  to  New  Zealand. 
He  responded  to  his  call  and  was  set 
apart  April  24,  1928,  and  arrived  in  his 
field  of  labor  May  20,  1928.  He  labored 
in  the  Bay  of  Islands,  Whangerei,  and 
Wellington  districts,  and  on  the  South 
Island.  While  still  in  the  ministry  he 
was  seriously  stricken  with  septicae- 
mia from  the  effects  of  which  he  died 
Oct.  4,  1929.  His  body  was  returned 
home  for  burial.  Elder  Wanner  was 
twenty-one  years  old  at  the  time  of  his 
death. 

WATT,  J.  Ralph,  an  Elder  who  died 
in  the  missionary  field,  was  born  Aug. 
24,  1899,  in  Layton,  Davis  Co.,  Utah,  a 
son  of  J.  H.  Watt  and  Jenett  Green. 
He  was  baptized  Aug.  25,  1907,  by  his 
father,  and  later  ordained  an  Elder.  As 


BIOGRAPHICAL  ENCYCLOPEDIA 


767 


a  resident  of  Tremonton,  Box  Elder 
Co.,  Utah,  he  was  called  on  a  mission 
to  the  Southern  States,  being  set  apart 
Jan.  13,  1920.  He  had  been  in  his  field 
of  labor  only  a  few  months  when  he 
was  stricken  with  pneumonia,  from  the 
effects  of  which  he  died  Oct.  10,  1921, 
in  Lamison,  Alabama.  His  body  was 
sent  home  in  care  of  a  companion, 

WEBB,  Elvin,  an  Elder  who  died 
while  filling  a  foreign  mission,  was 
born  Oct.  11,  1903,  in  Fillmore,  Millard 
Co.,  Utah,  a  son  of  William  James 
Webb  and  Eliza  Jane  Melville.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  3,  1912,  by  Daniel  A. 
Morris,  and  later  ordained  an  Elder. 
He  was  residing  at  Hinckley,  Utah, 
when  he  was  called  to  fill  a  mission  to 
the  Netherlands.  Responding  to  the 
call  he  was  set  apart  Feb.  2,  1926.  He 
arrived  in  Rotterdam  Feb.  21,  1926, 
and  a  short  time  later  (on  March  29, 
1926)  he  died  of  peritonitis.  He  was 
taken  suddenly  ill  one  morning  and 
passed  away  while  being  taken  to  a 
hospital.  A  special  memorial  service 
was  held  for  Elder  Webb  in  the  saints' 
hall,  "Excelsior",  in  Rotterdam.  His 
last  words  were  "Tell  mother  that  all 
is  well",  and  all  was  well,  for  Elder 
Webb  had  been  attending  to  his  mis- 
sionary duties  up  to  his  last  day  on 
earth.  His  remains  were  shipped  home 
accompanied  by  Elders  Edward  P. 
Young  and  William  R.  Wilcken. 

WILLES,  Ira  Jones,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  B, 
was  born  Jan.  21,  1812,  in  the  State  of 
New  York,  a  son  of  Eleazer  Willis  and 
Achsah  Jones.  Ira  joined  the  Church 
in  early  days  and  was  with  the  saints 
in  many  of  their  persecutions.  Having 
arrived  on  the  Missouri  River  as  an 
exile,  together  with  the  rest  of  the 
saints  from  Illinois,  he  enlisted  in  the 
Mormon  Battalion  in  July,  1846,  and 
marched  as  a  private  in  Company  B 
to  California.  In  1849  (May  13),  after 
his  discharge  as  a  soldier  and  his  ar- 
rival in  Utah  he  married  Malissa  Lott 


'^mith,  a  young  widow  of  the  Prophet 
Joseph  Smith  and  moved  to  Lehi, 
where  he  purchased  a  farm  and  be- 
came actively  engaged  in  farming.  He 
was  accidentally  killed  Dec.  5,  1863, 
while  crossing  Dry  Creek,  near  Lehi, 
by  a  load  of  wood  overturning  and 
burying  him  in  the  ice,  together  with 
his  nine  year  old  son,  Cornelius. 

WINN,  Dennis  Wilson,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  A, 
was  born  Dec.  11,  1826,  in  Madison 
County,  Alabama,  a  son  of  Miner  Winn 
and  Nancy  Wilson.  He  was  baptized 
by  James  B.  Hamilton  in  Adams 
County,  HI.,  in  1839,  went  with  his 
parents  to  Illinois,  where  they  em- 
braced the  gospel;  started  for  Mis- 
souri, but  troubles  which  came  upon 
them  changed  their  course  to  Adams 
County.  They  came  west  in  1845,  be- 
fore the  exodus;  Dennis  enlisted  with 
the  Battalion  at  Council  Bluffs  in  1846 
and  marched  to  California.  After  be- 
ing discharged,  he  stayed  in  California 
until  1848,  when  he  came  to  the  "Val- 
ley." He  married  and  lived  first  in 
Salt  Lake  City,  and  later  in  different 
parts  of  the  Territory.  He  was  one 
of  the  pioneers  of  Iron  County  in  1850- 
1851  with  Geo.  A.  Smith.  Twice  he 
went  back  to  the  States  on  business 
and  located  in  Ashley,  Utah,  in  the  fall 
of  1882.  He  lived  in  Richmond,  Cache 
Co.,  Utah,  and  was  one  of  the  first 
settlers  in  Preston  (Worm  Creek),  Ida- 
ho. He  died  Jan.  23,  1907,  in  Vernal, 
Utah. 

WOOD,  William,  a  member  of  the 
Mormon  Battalion,  Company  C,  was 
born  Feb.  3,  1823,  in  Hereford,  Here- 
fordshire, England,  a  son  of  John 
Wood  and  Ann  Lawrence.  He  was 
baptized  Sept.  23,  1840,  by  William 
Green  in  England,  emigrated  to  Amer- 
ica in  1842,  and  arrived  in  Nauvoo 
May  6,  1843.  After  being  exiled  from 
Nauvoo  with  the  other  saints  in  1846, 
he  enlisted  in  the  Battalion  at  Council 
Bluffs  and  marched  all  the  long,  long 


768 


LATTER-DAY  SAINT 


way  to  California.  He  finally  arrived 
in  the  "Valley"  in  1848.  In  1852  he 
went  to  San  Bernardino,  California, 
but  came  back  when  that  settlement 
was  broken  up  ,in  1857.  He  located  in 
Minersville  March  6,  1860. 

WOOLSEY,  Thomas,  a  member  of 
the  Mormon  Battalion,  Company  E, 
was  born  Nov.  3, 1805,  in  Pulaski  Coun- 
ty, Kentucky,  a  son  of  Joseph  Woolsey 
and  Abigail  Shiffer.  He  was  baptized 
in  Illinois  in  1834,  by  Cornelius  P. 
Gott,  came  to  Nauvoo  about  1841, 
worked  on  the  Temple  there  for  seven 
years,  came  west  with  the  other  saints 
in  February,  1846,  enlisted  in  the  Bat- 
talion at  Mount  Pisgah,  and  marched 
to  Santa  Fe  in  Company  E.  He  was 
sent  from  there  towards  Pueblo,  but 
went  only  part  of  the  way  when  he 
turned  back  alone  and  overtook  the 
main  command  just  as  they  were  en- 
tering the  one  hundred  mile  desert; 
he  continued  to  the  Gila  River,  and  was 
sent  back  with  a  detachment  with  mail 
from  the  brethren  to  Pueblo,  from 
where  he  and  John  H.  Tippets  went  in 
the  dead  of  winter  back  to  Winter 
Quarters,  suffering  untold  hardships. 
They  were  finally  taken  prisoners  by 
the  Pawnee  Indians  and  condemned  to 
death,  but  were  saved  by  the  timely 
arrival  of  the  chief.  (Elder  Woolsey 
was  afterwards  baptized  in  the  Manti 
Temple  for  that  chief).  The  Indians 
furnished  the  brethren  with  seven  days' 
provisions,  and  they  finally  got  to  Win- 
ter Quarters;  the  next  spring  they  came 
to  the  Valley,  with  the  original  Pio- 
neers, and  Bro.  Woolsey  built  the  first 
house  in  Salt  Lake  City  (Old  Fort), 
and  plowed  the  first  furrow  in  the 
Valley,  bringing  the  plow  from  the 
Pawnee  Indian  Agency.  He  continued 
to  California,  and  retured  back  to 
Winter  Quarters,  and  came  back  in 
four  years;  pioneered  several  places 
in  Utah,  and  died  Jan.  5,  1897,  in 
Wales,  Utah. 


WOOLLEY,  Marion  W.,  an  Elder 
who  died  in  the  missionary  field,  was 
born  April  2,  1895,  in  Kanab,  Kane  Co., 
Utah,  a  son  of  Edwin  D.  Woolley  and 
Florence  Snow.  He  was  baptized 
when  nine  years  old  by  Leo  McAllister, 
and  later  ordained  an  Elder.  While 
still  residing  at  Kanab  he  was  called 
on  a  mission  to  Australia,  being  set 
apart  Jan.  4,  1917.  Elder  Woolley  had 
been  laboring  as  a  missionary  in  Bris- 
bane, Australia,  where  he  died  June  10, 
1918,  following  an  operation  for  appen- 
dicitis. His  body  was  brought  home 
for  interment.  He  was  twenty-three 
years  old  and  was  a  graduate  of  the 
Branch  Agricultural  College  in  Cedar 
City.  He  had  been  in  Australia  about 
eighteen  months,  laboring  in  the  Tas- 
mania Conference,  where  he  performed 
a  good  mission  and  was  well  liked  by 
all  who  knew  him.  He  died  with  a 
strong  testimony  of  the  gospel.  As 
one  of  God's  servants  he  was  zealous 
in  the  performance  of  his  duties  as  a 
messenger  carrying  the  message  of 
peace  on  earth  and  good-will  to  men. 


WRISTON    (Clifford),    John    Price 

(Philip),  a  member  of  the  Mormon 
Battalion,  Company  A,  was  born  April 
13,  1823,  in  Hopkinsville,  Kentucky,  a 
son  of  John  Clifford  and  Elizabeth 
Price.  He  was  baptized  Feb.  16,  1845, 
in  Illinois,  by  James  Olive,  came  to 
Nauvoo  in  1845,  was  in  the  exodus  of 

1846,  joined  the  Battalion  and  wintered 
at  Pueblo,  and  arrived  in  the  "Valley" 
in  Capt.  Brown's  detachment  July  29, 

1847.  He  spoke  the  Shoshone,  Black- 
foot  and  Bannock  dialects  and  acted  as 
interpreter  and  president  of  the  Indian 
Mission  in  the  north  in  1859;  came  to 
Cache  Valley  in  1859,  and  located  in 
Gentile  Valley  about  1880.  On  his  In- 
dian missions  he  averted  dangers 
threatening  the  settlers  in  Cache  Val- 
ley. Being  raised  in  the  East  in  a 
family  by  the  name  of  Wriston,  he 
took  that  name,  but  his  real  name  was 
John  Philip  Clifford. 


INDEX. 


*Dcnotes  that   sketch    is    accompanied   by   portrait. 


Aagaard,  Andrew  James,  Vol.  2:584*. 
Aagaard,  Niels  Jensen,  Vol.  4:496. 
Abbott,  John  Austin,  Vol.  4:654. 
Abbott,  William  E.,  Vol.  3:289*. 
Abegg,  Moroni  Lehi,  Vol.  4:499. 
Abel,  Elijah,  Vol.  3:577. 
Abel,  Geo.  Edw.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:395. 
Abplanalp,  Peter,  Vol.  4:651. 
Adair,  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  3:577. 
Adams,  Annie  L.  Penrod,  Vol.  3:579*. 
Adams,  Barnabas  L.,  Vol.  3:577;  Vol. 

4:693. 
Adams,  Burton  Henry,  Vol.  4:642. 
Adams,  Charles,  Vol.  1:534*. 
Adams,  David  Barclay,  Vol.  4:408. 
Adams,  Emily  Caldwell,  Vol.  4:252. 
Adams,  Hugh  Leech,  Vol.  3:289^ 
Adams,  Hyrum,  Vol.  3:578*. 
Adams,  James  L.,  Vol.  4:572. 
Adams,  John,  jun.,  Vol.  4:440. 
Adams,  John  Fredrick,  Vol.  4:439. 
Adams,  John  Q.,  Vol.  3:1*;  Vol.  4:366. 
Adams,  Marion  F.,  Vol.  4:548. 
Adams,  Nathan,  Vol.  2:131. 
Adams,  Orson  B.,  Vol.  4:728. 
Adamson,  William  L.,  Vol.  3:579*. 
Agren,  Pehr  Alfred,  Vol.  4:584. 
Ahlander,  Anders  F.,  Vol.  2:281*. 
Ahlstrom,  Chas.  Delbert,  Vol.  4:570. 
Ahlstrom,  John  Godfrey,  Vol.  3:2. 
Ainscough,  Wm.  Thomas,  Vol.  4:392. 
Ainsworth,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:1. 
Akelund,  Lester  Eric,  Vol.  4:454. 
Akelund,  Peter  Isaac,  Vol.  4:454. 
Alberta  Stake,  Vol.  3:392-395. 
Albrecht,  Earl  Leroy,  Vol.  4:662. 

Alder,  EUse  Benson,  Vol.  4:177. 

Alder,  Godfrey,  Vol.  3:580. 

Aldous,  Heber  Kay,  Vol.  4:463. 

Aldrich,  Hazen,  Vol.  1:186. 

Alexander,  John,  Vol.  1:549. 

Alger,  Samuel  N.,  Vol.  1:798. 

Allen,  Alanson  David,  Vol.  2:338. 

Allen,  Albern,  Vol.  3:580. 

Allen,  Albert  Silas,  Vol.  4:486. 

Allen,  Alex.  Alma,  Vol.  4:465. 

Allen,  Ammon,  Vol.  2:339. 

Allen,  Andrew  A.,  Vol.  1:433*. 

Allen,  Andrew  Stephen,  Vol.  2:584. 

Allen,  Charles  Hopkins,  Vol.  2:140*. 

Allen,  David  Orlo,  Vol.  4:582. 

Allen,  Elijah   (of  Richmond),  Vol.  2: 
143. 

Allen,  Elijah  (of  Provo),  Vol.  3:581. 

Vol.  IV.  No.  49 


Allen,  Ezra  H.,  Vol.  4:728. 
Allen,  Heber  Chas.,  Vol.  4:576. 
Allen,  Heber  Franklin,  Vol.  4:635. 
Allen,  Heber  Simeon,  Vol.  4:635. 
Allen,  Inez  Knight,  Vol.  4:177. 
Allen,  James,  Vol.  1:508. 
Allen,  Jonathan  A.,  Vol.  4:527. 
Allen,  Jonathan  Alexander,  Vol.  3:2*. 
Allen,  John  Matthew  J.,  Vol.  2:195*. 
Allen,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  3:582. 
Allen,  Marion  D.,  Vol.  4:473. 
Allen,  Rufus,  Vol.  3:583;  Vol.  4:693. 
Allen,  Rufus  Albern,  Vol.  4:570. 
Allen,  Rufus  C,  Vol.  1:535. 
Allen,  Samuel  A.,  Vol.  2:584. 
Allen,  Thos.  Lonsdale,  Vol.  4:630. 
Allen,  Warner  Hoopes,  Vol.  2:142. 
Allen,  Wilbur  Bird,  Vol.  4:567. 
Allen,  William  C,  Vol.  1:571. 
Allen,  Wm.  L.  Nuttle,  Vol.  4:464. 
Alley,  Charles  Henry,  Vol.  2:510. 
Alley,  Emma  Turner,  Vol.  2:510*. 
Alley,  George,  Vol.  2:508. 
Alley,  George  Hubbard,  Vol.  2:509. 
Alley,  Mary  Symonds,  Vol.  2:509*. 
Alley,  Stephen  Webb,  Vol.  2:509*. 
Allphin,  Reuben  Lester,  Vol.  3:290*. 
Allred,  Edsil  Myron,  Vol.  4:598. 
Allred,  Ernest  Wilks,  Vol.  4:400. 
Allred,  Isaac,  Vol.  3:3. 
Allred,  J.  Urban,  Vol.  2:234*,  812. 
Allred,  James,  Vol.  3:583. 
Allred,  James  A.,  Vol.  4:549. 
Allred,  James  Riley,  Vol.  3:583. 
Allred,  James  T.  S.,  Vol.  4:728. 

Allred,  John  Allen,  Vol.  4:553. 

Allred,  John  G.,  Vol.  4:362,  636. 

Allred,  Joseph  G.,  Vol.  1:560. 

Allred,  Louis  Ephraim,  Vol.  2:92;  Vol. 
4:588. 

Allred,  Reddick  Newton,  Vol.  2:167*. 

Allred,  Reuben  Warren,  Vol.  4:622. 

Allred,  Rodney  Chase,  Vol.  4:81*. 

Allred,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:582. 

Allred,  Wilford  Leroy,  Vol.  2:573*. 

Alpine  Stake,  Vol.  4:395-397. 

Alston,  Clifford  A.,  Vol.  4:476. 

Alston,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:789*. 

Andersen,  Anders  Nielsen,  Vol.  2:10. 

Andersen,  Andrew  K.,  Vol.  3:584. 

Andersen,  Andrew  S.,  Vol.  2:541*. 

Andersen,  Christian,  Vol.  2:745*. 

Andersen,  Christine  B.,  Vol.  1:507*. 

Andersen,  Erastus  Snow,  Vol.  4:624. 

Andersen,  Frederick,  Vol.  2:211*. 

Andersen,  Frederick  Homer,  Vol.  4:397. 

December  5,   1936 


70 


INDEX 


Andersen,  George  David,  Vol.  3:3*. 
Andersen,  J.  Wesley,  Vol.  4:516. 
Andersen,  Joachim  C,  Vol.  2:579*. 
Andersen,  Lars  Strib,  Vol.  4^:622. 
Andersen,  Mons,  Vol.  1:506*. 
Andersen,  Oluff  B.,  Vol.  3:584. 
Andersen,  Parley,  Vol.  4:611. 
Andersen,  Soren,  Vol.  2:541*. 
Andersen,  Soren  P.,  Vol.  2:542*. 
Andersen,  Victor  Michael,  Vol.  4:613. 
Andersen,  Wilford  E.,  Vol.  4:423. 
Andersen,  William,  Vol.  4:411. 
Anderson,  Aldon  Joseph,  Vol.  4:229. 
Anderson,  Alex  Pyper,  Vol.  4:478. 
Anderson,  Alice  Brooks,  Vol.  3:4*. 
Anderson,  Anders  Peter,  Vol.  3:290*; 

Vol.  4:382*. 
Anderson,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:292*. 
Anderson,  Andrew  Bjerring,  Vol.  4:81*. 
Anderson,  Andrew  Hugo,  Vol.  2:341*. 
Anderson,  Anton,  Vol.  1:815*. 
Anderson,  Anton  Edward,  Vol.  3:5*. 
Anderson,  Anton  Edw.,  Vol.  4:511. 
Anderson,  Arthur  W.,  Vol.  4:459. 
Anderson,  August  Kull,  Vol.  2:237*. 
Anderson,  Carlos  Ozroe,  Vol.  4:624. 
Anderson,  Chas.  C,  Vol.  4:502. 
Anderson,  Chas.  Gustave,  Vol.  4:415. 
Anderson,  Charles  L.,  Vol.  1:544*. 
Anderson,  Charles  P.,  Vol.  1:554*. 
Anderson,  Christian  (of  Ammon),  Vol. 

4:493. 
Anderson,  Christian  (of  Fillmore),  Vol. 

1:529*. 
Anderson,    Christian    (of    Jameston), 

Vol.  3:6*. 
Anderson,  Christian   (from  Norway), 

Vol.  3:295*. 
Anderson,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:1*. 
Anderson,  David  B.,  Vol.  3:292*. 
Anderson,    Edward    H.,    Vol.    1:715*; 

Vol.  4:231,  368*. 
Anderson,  Ethel  Symons,  Vol.  4:252. 
Anderson,  Evans  Levere,  Vol.  4:82*. 
Anderson,  Everett  E.,  Vol.  4:537. 
Anderson,  Geo.  E.,  Vol.  4:504. 
Anderson,  Geo.  Noel,  Vol.  4:645. 
Anderson,  Gustaf  Erik,  Vol.  4:397. 
Anderson,  Gustave  T.,  Vol.  3:584. 
Anderson,  Hakon  Walter,  Vol.  4:728. 
Anderson,  Hans,  Vol.  1:815*. 
Anderson,  Henry  Claude,  Vol.  4:565. 
Anderson,  Hyrum  Albert,  Vol.  4:114. 
Anderson,  James,  Vol.  4:611. 
Anderson,  James  Albert,  Vol.  3:9*. 
Anderson,  James  H.,  Vol.  1:778*;  Vol. 

4:231*,  680. 
Anderson,  James  Peter,  Vol.  3:294. 
Anderson,  James  William,  Vol.  2:572. 
Anderson,  Jane  Ballantyne,  Vol.  4:252. 
Anderson,  John,  Vol.  2:301*. 
Anderson,  John  C,  Vol.  2:237*. 
Anderson,  John  E.,  Vol,  4:529. 


Anderson,  John  Forbis,  Vol.  2:585;  Vol. 

4:4*. 
Anderson,  John  H.,  Vol.  1:767*;  Vol. 

4:382,  486. 
Anderson,  John  Lee,  Vol.  4:450. 
Anderson,  John  William,  Vol.  3:298*. 
Anderson,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:478. 
Anderson,  Lars,  Vol.  4:446. 
Anderson,  Lewis,  Vol.  2:222*. 
Anderson,  Lewis  Robert,  Vol.  2:560*. 
Anderson,  Lorenzo  Wm.,  Vol.  4:365. 
Anderson,  Lyle  M.,  Vol.  4:493. 
Anderson,  Marcus  C,  Vol.  3:585. 
Anderson,  Martha  Hansen,  Vol.  3:8*. 
Anderson,   May,  Vol.  4:271*. 
Anderson,  Nephi,  Vol.  3:296*;  Vol.  4: 

231,  680*. 
Anderson,  Nephi   (of  Manavu)),  Vol. 

4:656. 
Anderson,  Nephi  A.,  Vol.  2:145*. 
Anderson,   Niels   O.,  Vol.  2:544*. 
Anderson,  Norman  S.,  Vol,  4:450. 
Anderson,  Ole,  Vol.  2:585*. 
Anderson,  Oscar  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:613. 
Anderson,  Pernilla  J.,  Vol.  3:6*. 
Anderson,  Peter   (of  Oak  City),  Vol. 

3:7*. 
Anderson,    Peter    (of    Morgan),   Vol. 

3:8*. 
Anderson,  Thomas  M.,  Vol.  4:567. 
Anderson,  Vesta  E.  Edwards,  Vol.  4: 

273. 
Anderson,  Walter  H.,  Vol.  3:585. 
Anderson,  Wilford  Chris.,  Vol.  4:468. 
Anderson,  William,  Vol.  2:585. 
Andreasen,  Jens  Peter,  Vol.  2:250*. 
Andrew,  Richard  Denton,  Vol.  4:574. 
Andrus,  Geo.  Boyes,  Vol.  4:630. 
Andrus,  James,  Vol.  2:586*. 
Andrus,  Joseph  Boyes,  Vol.  4:6. 
Andrus,  Millard  Burgess,  Vol.  4:6. 
Andrus,  Milo,  Vol.  3:585. 
Andrus,  Milo,  jun.,  Vol.  4:442. 
Andrus,  Robert,  Vol.  4:493. 
Andrus,  Silas  Terry,  Vol.  3:587. 
Angell,  Harvey  Leon,  Vol.  3:587. 
Angell,  Solomon,  Vol.  4:591. 
Angell,  Truman  Osborn,  Vol.  4:693. 
Angus,  John  Alex.,  Vol.  4:588. 
Appleby,  Wm.  L,  Vol.  4:330. 
Arave,  David  Eli,  Vol.  3:299. 
Arave,  Jos.  Clarence,  Vol.  4:615. 
Arbuckle,  George,  Vol.  4:476. 
Archibald,  Andrew  L.,  Vol.  3:588. 
Archibald,  David,  Vol.  2:588*. 
Archibald,  David  Watson,  Vol.  4:469. 
Archibald,  Robert  G.,  Vol.  4:469. 
Archibald,  Roy  G.,  Vol.  3:588. 
Archibald,  Thos.  Halliday,  Vol.  4:404. 
Argyle,  Benjamin,  Vol.  2:588*. 
Argyle,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:567. 
Armenian  Mission,  Vol.  4:305. 
Armstrong,  David,  Vol.  2:190. 
Armstrong,  Francis,  Vol.  2:482*. 


INDEX 


771 


Armstrong,  Isabella  S.,  Vol.  2:484*. 
Armstrong,  William,  Vol.  3:588*;  Vol. 

4:309*. 
Armstrong,  Wm.  F.,  Vol.  4:572. 
Armstrong,  Wm.  W.,  Vol.  4:725. 
Arnold,  Alicia  Read,  Vol.  2:493*. 
Arnold,  Amos  G.,  Vol.  4:469. 
Arnold,  Henry,  Vol.  3:589. 
Arnold,  Orson  Pratt,  Vol.  2:492*. 
Arnoldsen,  Hyrum  Smith,  Vol.  4:546. 
Arnoldson,  Pharo,  Vol.  4:546. 
Arthur,  Christopher  J.,  Vol.  2:186*. 
Asay,  Aaron,  Vol.  4:570. 
Asay,  Eleazer,  jun..  Vol.  4:516. 
Ashby,  Nathaniel,  jun.,  Vol.  3:590;  Vol. 

4:591. 
Ashby,  Rodney  Badger,  Vol.  4:450. 
Ashcroft,  Josiah  Emer,  Vol.  4:595. 
Ashton,  Edward  Morris,  Vol.  4:7*. 
Ashton,  Edward  T.,  Vol.  1:685*. 
Ashton,  EUas  Conway,  Vol.  3:299*. 
Ashton,  George  Savage,  Vol.  4:8*. 
Ashton,  Marvin  O.,  Vol.  4:476. 
Ashworth,  William  Booth,  Vol.  2:39. 
Agmussen,  Carl  Christian,  Vol.  4:83*. 
Asper,  Elias,  Vol.  4:630. 
Asper,  William,  Vol.  1:812*. 
Astle,  Richard  Thos.,  Vol.  4:529. 
Atkin,  Edward  Maughn,  Vol.  3:300*. 
Atkin,  Thos,  jun..  Vol.  1:546,  822*. 
Atkinson,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  3:591. 
Atkinson,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:591. 
Atwood,  Frank  Dan,  Vol.  4:642. 
Atwood,  Lawrence  Miner,  Vol.  4:643. 
Atwood,  Leslie  C,  Vol.  3:591. 
Atwood,  Millen,  Vol.  1:63;  Vol.  4:693. 
Atwood,  Millen  Dan,  Vol.  2:26*. 
Atwood,  Miner  G.,  Vol.  4:378. 
Atwood,  Samuel  Frink,  Vol.  3:300*. 
Auerbach,  Herbert  F.,  Vol.  4:725. 
Austin,  Edwin  N.,  Vol.  1:452*. 
Austin,  Francis  Mark,  Vol.  4:442. 
Austin,  Heber  Charles,  Vol.  3:301*. 
Austin,  John,  Vol.  4:114*. 
Austin,   Mark,   Vol.   2:589,   744*;    Vol. 

4:201*. 
Austin,  Philo  W.,  Vol.  1:446. 
Austin,  Torrey  Lynn,  Vol.  4:400. 
Australasian  Mission,  Vol.  4:305-309. 
Australian  Mission,  Vol.  4:309-311. 
Averett,  Jeduthan,  Vol.  4:729. 
Aveson,  Robert,  Vol.  1:679*. 
Awe  Awe,  Tamihana  (Te),  Vol.  3:726. 
Aylett,  John  Argent,  Vol.  4:8. 

B 

Babbitt,  Almon  W.,  Vol.  1:284. 
Backman,  Emuel,  Vol.  3:592. 
Backman,  LeGrand  P.,  Vol.  4:604. 
Backman,  Samuel  C,  Vol.  2:374*. 
Badger,  Ralph  A.,  Vol.  4:378. 
Badger,  Rodney,  Vol.  3:592;  Vol.  4:693. 
Badger,  Rodney  C,  Vol.  4:231. 
Bagley,  Edward  A.,  Vol.  3:302*. 


Bagley,  Edward  Carroll,  Vol.  4:611. 
Bagley,  Ellis  Lynn,  Vol.  4:662. 
Bagnall,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:164*. 
Bagnall  Joseph  F.,  Vol.  4:9,  535. 
Bahr,  Albert  A.,  Vol.  4:588. 
Bailey,  Delores  Fay,  Vol.  4:202*. 
Bailey,  Harvey  Clive,  Vol.  4:474. 
Bailey,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:303*. 
Bair,  Hyrum  Lester,  Vol.  4:411. 
Baird,  Robert  Erwing,  Vol.  4:693. 
Baker,  Claude  Vincent,  Vol.  4:474. 
Baker,  Henry  Friend,  Vol.  4:408. 
Baker,  Ira,  Vol.  4:446. 
Baker,  John  Fred.,  Vol.  4:514. 
Baker,  Stephen  Martindale,  Vol.  4:624. 
Baker,  Wm.  Benson,  Vol.  4:591. 
Baldwin,   Caleb,  Vol.   2:589. 
Baldwin,  George,  Vol.  2:417*. 
Baldwin,  Nathan  B.,  Vol.  3:593. 
Balfour,  John,  Vol.  2:442*. 
Ball,  Elihu  K.,  Vol.  1:550*. 
Ball,  Leonard  Garfield,  Vol.  4:493. 
Ball,  Samuel  Frederick,  Vol.  3:10*. 
Ball,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:259*. 
Ballantyne,  Richard,  Vol.  1:703*. 
Ballantyne,  Zachariah,  Vol.  4:553. 
Ballard,  Henry,  Vol.  1:419*. 
Ballard,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  1:426;  Vol.  3: 

593*. 
Ballard,  Henry  Wm.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:435. 
Ballard,  James  Monroe,  Vol.  4:678. 
Ballard,    Melvin    Joseph,    Vol.    1:419; 
Vol.  3:744*;  Vol.  4:231,  364*,  380*. 
Balle,  Christian  T.,  Vol.  3:303*. 
Balle,  Emma  Eugenie  T.,  Vol.  3:304. 
Ballif,  Serge  Fredrick,  Vol.  3:306;  Vol. 

4:386. 
Ballif,  Serge  Louis,  Vol.  3:305;  Vol.  4: 

386. 
Ballinger,  Pearson,  Vol.  2:123. 
Balls,  Kenneth  Grant,  Vol.  4:490. 
Bangerter,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:10*. 
Bankhead,  Evan  Haslem,  Vol.  4:486. 
Banks,  Cornelius  H.,  Vol.  2:465*. 
Banks,  David  Albert,  Vol.  4:490. 
Banks,  John,  Vol.  2:590*. 
Banks,  John  Elmer,  Vol.  2:282*. 
Banner,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:432. 
Bannock  Stake,  Vol.  4:397-400. 
Barber,  Adeline  Hatch,  Vol.  4:179. 
Bardsley,  Leo.  Duffin,  Vol.  4:480. 
Barentsen,  Andrew  M.,  Vol.  2:577*. 
Barfuss,  Christian,  Vol.  4:511. 
Barker,  Fred  EUis,  Vol.  4:310. 
Barker,  Frederick,  Vol.  3:307. 
Barker,  James  Louis,  Vol.  4:203. 
Barker,  Joseph  Fredrick,  Vol.  4:10. 
Barker,  Kate  M.,  Vol.  4:179. 
Barlow,  Israel,  Vol.  4:687. 
Barlow,  Jos.  Smith,  Vol.  4:582. 
Barlow,  Kimber  C,  Vol.  4:432. 
Barlow,  Truman  C,  Vol.  4:493. 
Barlow,  Wilford  Walter,  Vol.  4:621. 
Barnes,  Arthur  F.,  Vol.  1:650*. 
Barnes,  Arthur  F.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:115. 


772 


INDEX 


Barnes,  Harold  Sansom,  Vol.  4:116*. 
Barnes,  Herschel,  Vol.  4:529. 
Barnes,  John  R.,  Vol.  1:464*. 
Barnes,  Loi'enzo  D.,  Vol.  3:307. 
Barnes,  Mark,  Vol.  4:334. 
Barnes,  William  J.,  Vol.  3:11*. 
Barney,  Alma,  Vol.  3:11*. 
Barney,  Danielson  B.,  Vol.  2:196*. 
Barney,  Edson,  Vol.  4:687. 
Barney,  Jos.  Orson,  Vol.  4:459. 
Barney,  Lewis,  Vol.  3:594;  Vol.  4:693. 
Barney,  Walter,  Vol.  4:729. 
Barnhurst,  Meltiah  Hatch,  Vol.  4:570. 
Barnum,  Charles  D.,  Vol.  3:594;  Vol. 

4:694. 
Barratt,    Matilda    M.    W.,    Vol.   4:272, 

273*. 
Barrett,    Georgianna    Pacific,   Vol.    4: 

117*. 
Barron,  Alexander  F.,  Vol.  3:595;  Vol. 

4:729*. 
Barrow,  Freeman  Frank,  Vol.  3:308. 
Barrus,  Albert  Almon,  Vol.  3:309. 
Barrus,  Ellen  Martin,  Vol.  3:13*. 
Barrus,   Orlando,  Vol.  4:366. 
Barrus,  Orlando  Clark,  Vol.  4:731. 
Barrus,  Orrin  Orlando,  Vol.  4:627. 
Barrus,  Ruel,  Vol.  3:12*. 
Bartholomew,  Geo.  M.,  Vol.  4:480. 
Bartholomew,  Henry  Lee,  Vol.  4:480. 
Bartholomew,   John,   Vol.   3:309*. 
Bartholomew,  Noah  W.,  Vol.  3:309. 
Bartlett,  Charles  Bart,  Vol.  4:360,  651. 
Barton,  Eliza,  Vol.  2:539*. 
Barton,  Ellen  Bechall,  Vol.  2:513*. 
Barton,  Florence  S.,  Vol.  2:455*. 
Barton,  George  Ernest,  Vol.  2:591*. 
Barton,  Isaac,  Vol.  1:676*. 
Barton,  James,  Vol.  2:539*. 
Barton,  Peter,  Vol.  1:463*. 
Barton,  Stephen  S.,  Vol.  4:572. 
Barton,  Walter  H.,  Vol.  3:310*,  595. 
Barton,  Walter  K.,  Vol.  4:118*,  465. 
Barton,  Wm.  B.,  Vol.  1:667*;  Vol.  4:725. 
Barton,  William  Henry,  Vol.  2:455*. 
Bastian,  Gearsen  S.,  Vol.  1:344*. 
Bastian,  Niels  Soren,  Vol.  4:465. 
Bateman,  Edward  A.,  Vol.  1:592*. 
Bateman,  James  M.,  Vol.  2:332*. 
Bateman,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:590. 
Bateman,  Sophronia  A.  W.,  Vol.  2:592*. 
Bateman,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:591. 
Bateman,  William  L.,  Vol.  2:591*. 
Bates,  Ernest  Geo.,  Vol.  4:671. 
Bates,  Ormus  Ariah,  Vol.  3:14*. 
Bates,  Orson  Parley,  Vol.  3:13. 
Batt,  George,  Vol.  4:306. 
Batty,  Miles  Marquis,  Vol.  4:651. 
Bauer,  Eberhard,  Vol.  4:493. 
Bawden,  Ann  Ireland,  Vol.  2:464*. 
Bawden,  Henry,  Vol.  2:463. 
Bawden,  Henry  Lambert,  Vol.  2:455*. 
Bawden,  John  Henry,  Vol.  4:566. 
Bawden,  Sarah  F.  H.,  Vol.  2:464*. 
Baxter,  John  M.,  Vol.  1:331. 


Baxter,  Julia  Strong,  Vol.  4:252. 
Baxter,    Lotta    Robina    Paul,    Vol.    3: 

311*;  Vol.  4:179. 
Baxter,  Samuel  Emerson,  Vol.  3:310*. 
Bay,  Ira  Milton,  Vol.  4:474. 
Bayles,  Evelyn  Lyman,  Vol.  3:16*. 
Bayles,  Hanson,  Vol.  3:14*. 
Bayles,  Hanson  Durham,  Vol.  4:11. 
Bayles,  Mary  Ann  D.,  Vol.  3:15*. 
Beach,  Lyman  Smith,  Vol.  4:459. 
Beal,  David  Nelson,  Vol.  2:745*. 
Beal,  Henry  (of  Ephraim),  Vol.  1:521; 

Vol.  2:226*. 
Beal,  Ida  Peterson,  Vol.  4:180. 
Beal,  John  Samuel,  Vol.  2:593*. 
Beal,  Newel  K.,  Vol.  4:459. 
Beal,  Thos.  Andrew,  Vol.  4:231*,  622. 
Bean,  Geo.  Washington,  Vol.  4:611. 
Bean,  James  William,  Vol.  2:6*. 
Bean,  Joshua  B.,  Vol.  4:725. 
Bean,  Virginius,  Vol.  2:209*. 
Bear  Lake  Stake,  Vol.  4:400-404. 
Bear  River  Stake,  Vol.  4:404-408. 
Beard,  George,  Vol.  4:630. 
Beardall,  John  Wm.,  Vol.  4:476. 
Beatie,  Phoebe  L.  Y.,  Vol.  2:593*;  Vol. 

4:180. 
Beatie,  Walter  Josiah,  Vol.  1:649*. 
Beauchamp,  Robert,  Vol.  4:306. 
Beaver  Stake,  Vol.  4:408-411. 
Beazer,  Mark  Ephraim,  Vol.  2:19*. 
Bebee,  Leroy  W.,  Vol.  1:537*. 
Beck,  Herbert,  Vol.  3:312. 
Beck,  John,  Vol.  1:688*. 
Beck,  John  Forsyth,  Vol.  2:594. 
Beck,  John  W.,  Vol.  4:366. 
Beck,  Joseph  Ellison,  Vol.  2:594*. 
Beck,  Joseph  Peter,  Vol.  3:16*. 
Beckstead,  Alexander,  Vol.  2:745*. 
Beckstead,  Byram  H.,  Vol.  2:324*;  Vol. 

4:667. 
Beckstead,  Gordon  S.,  Vol.  1:576*. 
Beckstead,  Henry  (South  Jordan),  Vol, 

2:746*. 
Beckstead,  Henry    (Midvale),  Vol.  4: 

457. 
Beckstead,  Henry  Byram,  Vol.  1:593; 

Vol.  2:747*. 
Beckstead,  Wm.  Warren,  Vol.  4:576. 
Beckstrand,  ,Iohn  A.,  Vol.  3:312*. 
Beckstrom,  Wm.  Chas.,  Vol.  4:567. 
Bee,  John  Moxie,  Vol.  4:533. 
Beebe,  Clara  Woodruff,  Vol.  4:274*. 
Beebe,  LeRoy  Winslow,  Vol.  4:678. 
Beebe,  O.  C,  Vol.  4:231. 
Beecher,  Elihu  Ulysses,  Vol.  4:582. 
Beecher,  William  J.,  Vol.  3:596. 
Beeley,  Arthur  L.,  Vol.  4:232. 
Beeley,  Glenn  Johnson,  Vol.  4:253,  274. 
Beesley,  Alvin  A.,  Vol.  2:406*. 
Beesley,  Clarissa  A.,  Vol.  4:252*. 
Beesley,  Ebenezer,  Vol.  1:739*. 
Beesley,  Evangeline  T.,  Vol.  4:253. 
Beesley,  Robt.  Heber,  Vol.  4:548. 
Beesley,  Wilford  Angus,  Vol.  4:118*. 


INDEX 


773 


Befeton,  James  Andrew,  Vol.  4:519. 
Behrmann,  Henry,  Vol.  4:676. 
Bell,  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:669. 
Bell,  Herbert  Horace,  Vol.  2:595*. 
Bell,  James  F.,  Vol.  3:596;  Vol.  4:346. 
Bell,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  3:597. 
Bell,  William,  Vol.  4:669. 
Belliston,  Albert  Henry,  Vol.  3:313-. 
Belliston,  Wm.  Thos.,  Vol.  4:442. 
Belnap,  Arias  Guy,  Vol.  4:558. 
Belnap,  Francis  Eugene,  Vol.  4:469. 
Belnap,  Gilbert,  Vol.  2:747*. 
Belnap,  Hyrum,  Vol.  2:247*. 
Belnap,  Reuben,  Vol.  2:596*. 
Bendixen,  Knud,  Vol.  2:302*. 
Bennett,  Archibald  Fowler,  Vol.  4:681*. 
Bennett,  Eli,  Vol.  4:505. 
Bennett,  Ephraim,  Vol.  3:16*. 
Bennett,  Frances  M.  Grant,  Vol.  4:274. 
Bennett,  George,  Vol.  3:17*. 
Bennett,  George  Riley,  Vol.  3:18*. 
Bennett,  Hiram  Bell,  Vol.  4:527. 
Bennett,  Jesse  John,  Vol.  4:527. 
Bennett,  John  Foster,  Vol.  4:203*. 
Bennett,  John  Harvey,  Vol.  4:392. 
Bennett,  Marjorie  Gowans,  Vol.  4:275. 
Bennett,  Rosetta  Wallace,  Vol.  4:254. 
Bennett,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:57*. 
Bennett,  William  B.,  Vol.  2:303*. 
Bennion,  Adam  S.,  Vol.  4:204. 
Bennion,  Cora  Lindsay,  Vol.  4:180. 
Bennion,  David,  Vol.  4:588,  651. 
Bennion,  Edwin,  Vol.  4:349*. 
Bennion,  Eliza  Slade,  Vol.  4:275. 
Bennion,  Harden,  Vol.  4:11,*  731. 
Bennion,  Heber,  Vol.  1:569*. 
Bennion,  Hyrum,  jun..  Vol.  2:473*;  Vol. 

4:442. 
Bennion,  Israel,  Vol.  1:547. 
Bennion,  John,  Vol.  3:597. 
Bennion,  Katherine  Snow,  Vol.  4:275. 
Bennion,  Milton,  Vol.  4:205*. 
Bennion,  M.  Lynn,  Vol.  4:204*. 
Bennion,  Owen,  Vol.  4:454. 
Bennion,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:597. 
Bennion,  Samuel  Otis,  Vol.  3:18*;  Vol. 

4:732*. 
Bennion,  Samuel  R.,  Vol.  1:478. 
Bennion,  Sam.  Thomas,  Vol.  4:476. 
Bennion,  Wilford,  Vol.  2:133*. 
Benson,  Andrew  Peter,  Vol.  2:56. 
Benson,  Ezra  T.  (Apostle),  Vol.  1:99*; 

Vol.  4:339,  694. 
Benson,  Ezra  Taft  (mission  president). 

Vol.  4:312. 
Benson,  Geo,  Taft,  jun.,  Vol.  4:465. 
Benson,  Jens  Peter,  Vol.  1:405*. 
Benson,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:446. 
Benson,  Melvin  Jeremiah,  Vol.  4:589. 
Benson,  Serge  Ballif,  Vol.  4:435. 
Benson  Stake,  Vol.  4:411-415. 
Benson,  Yeppa,  Vol.  3:313. 
Bent,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:367. 
Bentley,  Jos.  Chas.,  Vol.  4:499. 
Bentley,  Wm.  Oscar,  jun..  Vol.  4:592. 


Berg,  Carl,  Vol.  4:459. 
Berg,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  1:796*. 
Berg,  Hosea,  Vol.  4:418. 
Berg,  Ole  H.,  Vol.  1:795*. 
Berlin,  Andrew  E.,  Vol.  2:342*. 
Bernhisel,  John  M.,  Vol.  1:723. 
Berrett,  Wm.  Silas,  Vol.  4:585. 
Berry,  John  Alphonzo,  Vol.  3:314. 
Berry,  John  William,  Vol.  3:314*. 
Berry,  William  Shanks,  Vol.  3:314*. 
Berthelsen,  Soren  C,  Vol.  2:206. 
Bertoch,  Ann  Cutcliflfe,  Vol.  2:463*. 
Bertoch,  James,  Vol.  2:462*. 
Bertrand,  Louis  A.,  Vol.  4:334. 
Beus,  James  Richard,  Vol.  4:665. 
Bevan,  James,  Vol.  3:598. 
Bickmore,  Danford  M.,  Vol.  4:487. 
Bickmore,  William,  Vol.  4:404. 
Biesinger,  Thomas,  Vol.   3:316*. 
Bigelow,  Moroni,  Vol.  3:598. 
Big  Horn  Stake,  Vol.  4:415-418. 
Bigler,  Adelbert,  Vol.  4:613. 
Bigler,  Henry  William,  Vol.  3:599;  Vol. 

4:339. 
Bigler,  Jacob  G.,  Vol.  1:515;  Vol.  2:113. 
Bigler,  James,  Vol.  4:490. 
Bigler,  James  Thaddeus,  Vol.  4:404. 
Billings,  Geo.  Pierce  (Bonneville),  Vol. 
3:318. 

Billings,  Geo.  Pierce  (Manti),  Vol.  4: 
694. 

Billings,  Geo.  Victor,  Vol.  4:454. 

Billings,  Leonard  Boyd,  Vol.  4:654. 

Billings,  Titus,  Vol.  1:242. 

Bills,   Alexander,  Vol.  4:423. 

Bills,  David,  Vol.  4:13,  667. 

Bills,  George  W.,  Vol.  1:570. 

Bills,  Gordon  S.,  Vol.  1:583*. 

Bills,  John  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:517. 

Bills,  Wm.  A.,  Vol.  4:667. 

Bills,  Wm.  Ervine,  Vol.  4:418. 

Binder,  William  L.  S.,  Vol.  1:640*;  Vol. 
4:725. 

Bingham,  Adam  A.,  Vol.  2:253. 

Bingham,  Albern  A.,  Vol.  3:318*. 

Bingham,  Brigham  H.,  Vol.  3:600. 

Bingham,  Calvin  Perry,  Vol.  4:651. 

Bingham,  Edwin  Aldous,  Vol.  4:553. 

Bingham,  Elisha  H.,  Vol.  4:671. 

Bingham,  Erastus,  Vol.  3:600. 

Bingham,  Erastus,  jun..  Vol.  4:732. 

Bingham,  Erastus  P.,  Vol.  2:342*. 

Bingham,  Francis,  Vol.  2:347*. 

Bingham,  Fred  G.,  Vol.  4:651. 

Bingham,  Heber  Raymond,  Vol.  4:465. 

Bingham,  John  Samuel,  Vol.  4:306. 

Bingham,  Sanford,  Vol.  2:252*. 

Bingham,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:733. 

Bingham,  Wallace  D.,  Vol.  4:733. 

Binley,  John  Wesley,  Vol.  4:733. 

Birch,  Erastus  Franklin,  Vol.   3:19*. 

Bird,  Edwin  Harry,  Vol.  4:408. 

Bird,  Kelsey  Walter,  Vol.  4:551. 

Bird,  Mormon  Delbert,  Vol.  3:319*. 

Bird,  Reaves  Alex.,  Vol.  4:523. 


774 


INDEX 


Bird,  Stanley  Wm.,  Vol.  4:375. 
Birtcher,  Benjamin   Franklin,  Vol.  4: 

599. 
Bischoff,  Joseph  Peter,  Vol.  3:219. 
Bitters,  Franklin,  Vol.  4:487. 
Bjarnason,   Loftur,   Vol.   4:342. 
Bjarnason,  Gisle  E.,  Vol.  4:342. 
Bjarnason,  Magnus,  Vol.  4:343. 
Bjarnason,  Thorvarinne,  Vol.  4:343. 
Bjorklund,  Pehr  A.,  Vol.  3:602. 
Bjorkman,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:602. 
Bjorkman,  Oscar  Gotfred,  Vol.  3:20*. 
Black,  Chas.  Jefferson,  Vol.  4:654. 
Black,  Edward  Webb,  Vol.  4:599. 
Black,  George,  Vol.  3:20*. 
Black,  Jos.   Smith,  Vol.  4:450. 
Black,  Maria  Hansen,  Vol.  3:22*. 
Black,  William  Morley,  Vol.  3:21*. 
Blackburn,  Elias  H.,  Vol.  1:491*. 
Blackburn,  Manasseh  J.,  Vol.  2:93. 
Blackburn,   Thomas,   Vol.   4:418. 
Blackburn,  Thos.  Henry,  Vol.  4:426. 
Blackburn,  Thos.  Henry  B.,  Vol.  4:582. 
Blackburn,  William,  Vol.  3:320. 
Blackfoot  Stake,  Vol.  4:418-423. 
Blaine  Stake,  Vol.  4:423. 
Blaisdell,  John  Edw.,  Vol.  4:519. 
Blake,  Herbert  J.,  Vol.  4:476. 
Blake,  James,  Vol.  3:321*. 
Blake,  Isaac  Brigham,  Vol.  4:599. 
Blake,  Sam.  Henry.,  Vol.  4:613. 
Blake,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:584*. 
Blake,  William,  Vol.  1:476. 
Blanchard,  Asael  D.,  Vol.  4:579. 
Blanchard,  Byron,  Vol.  4:671. 
Blaser,  Augustine  Fred.,  Vol.  4:579. 
Blaser,  Ernest,  Vol.  4:469. 
Bleak,  George  O.,  Vol.  3:603. 
Blight,  James,  Vol.  2:254*. 
Blood,  Heber  C,  Vol.  4:548. 
Blood,  Henry  Hooper,  Vol.  3:23*. 
Blood,  Henry  Russell,  Vol.  4:335. 
Blood,  William,  jun..  Vol.  1:465*. 
Blood,  William,  sen..  Vol.  3:24. 
Bloomfield,  Alex.  F.,  Vol.  4:595. 
Bloomfield,  Richard  Henry,  Vol.  4:595. 
Blunck,  Hans  Henry  C.,  Vol.  3:322*. 
Bluth,  John  Vitallis,  Vol.  2:244*;  Vol. 
4:122. 

Bockholt,  Dirk  (or  Derek),  Vol.  3:24*; 
Vol.  4:350*. 

Bodily,  Christopher  Wm.,  Vol.  4:589. 

Bodily,  Edwin,  Vol.  4:466. 

Bodily,  Henry  J.,  Vol.  4:466,  493. 

Bodily,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  2:240*. 

Bodily,  Robert,  Vol.  3:603. 

Boggs,  Francis,"Vol.  3:322;  Vol.  4:694. 

Bohn,  Jacob  J.  M.,  Vol.  3:604*. 

Boise  Stake,  Vol.  4:423-426. 

Boley,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:733. 

Bolton,  Curtis  E.,  Vol.  4:334. 

Bolton,  John  Gilbert,  Vol.  4:589. 

Bond,  Jesse,  Vol.  3:25*. 

Bond,  Sarah  Adams,  Vol.  3:26*. 

Bond,  William  Samuel,  Vol.  3:323. 


Bone,  Francis,  Vol.  3:24*. 
Booth,  Alfred  Lewis,  Vol.  4:656. 
Booth,  John  E.,  Vol.  1:494*;  Vol.  4:362. 
Booth,  Joseph  Wilford,  Vol.  4:305. 
Booth,  Josephine  D.,  Vol.  1:503. 
Booth,  Richard  T.,  jun.,  Vol.  3:604. 
Booth,  Wayne  Chipman,  Vol.  4:395. 
Boren,  Coleman  Briant,  Vol.  4:599. 
Boren,  Leroy,  Vol.  4:515. 
Borgeson,   Anders    (Andrew),   Vol.   4: 

84*. 
Borrowman,  John,  Vol.  3:605. 
Borup,  David  John,  Vol.  4:529. 
Borup,  Peter,  jun..  Vol.  3:605. 
Boud,  John  Wallace,  Vol.  2:372. 
Bourne,   Geo.   T.,  Vol.  4:725. 
Bourne,  John  Albert,  Vol.  3:26*. 
Bowen,  Albert  Ernest,  Vol.  4:232*. 
Bowen,  David  John,  Vol.  2:134;  Vol.  4: 

446. 
Bowen,  Joseph  Leonard,  Vol.  3:27*. 
Bowers,  Frank  B.,  Vol.  4:507. 
Bowker,  John  Squires,  Vol.  3:27*. 
Bowles,  George,  Vol.  4:478. 
Bowman,  Andrew  G.,  Vol.  2:402,  808*. 
Bowman,  Claudius,  Vol.  4:499. 
Bowman,  Elmer  Squires,  Vol.  4:531. 
Bowman,  Henry  Eyring,  Vol.  4:385. 
Bowman,  John  F.,  Vol.  4:232. 
Bowns,  James,  Vol.  3:28*. 
Bowns,  Jared  Harrison,  Vol.  4:14. 
Bowring,  John  Franklin,  Vol.  4:426. 
Box,  Elijah  Arnold,  Vol.  2:59*. 
Box  Elder  Stake,  Vol.  4:426-432. 
Boyce,  Albert  Myron,  Vol.  4:579. 
Boyce,  John,  Vol.  2:748*. 
Boyer,  Ira  Wayne,  Vol.  4:517. 
Boyle,  Henry  Green,  Vol.  4:380,  733. 
Boynton,  John  F.,  Vol.  1:91. 
Bracken,  Aaron  Franklin,  Vol.  4:627. 
Biackenbury,  Joseph  B.,  Vol.  2:597. 
Bradford,  Nettie  Maria,  Vol.  4:180. 
Bradford,  Robert  H.,  Vol.  2:411. 
Bradford,  Stella  Paul,  Vol.  4:275. 
Bradley,  Bigelow,  Vol.  4:644. 
Bradley,  Geo.  W.,  Vol.  4:535. 
Bradley,  Orlando,  Vol.  2:165*. 
Bradshaw,  Ernest,  Vol.  4:671. 
Bradshaw,  Ira  Hinton,  Vol.  4:14. 
Brady,  C.  Franklin,  Vol.  4:609. 
Brady,  John  Jefferson,  Vol.  4:609. 
Brady,  Jordan,  Vol.  3:29*. 
Brady,  Marion  H.,  Vol.  2:596. 
Bramwell,  E.  Ernest,  Vol.  4:14*. 
Bramwell,    Franklin    S.,    Vol.    1:771*; 

Vol.  4:349,  364*. 
Bramwell,  Geo.  W.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:553. 
Brand,  Alexander  A.,  Vol.  2:313. 
Brandley,  Elsie  Talmage,  Vol.  4:254. 
Brandley,  Theodore,  Vol.  1:387*;  Vol. 

4:386. 
Brannan,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:606;  Vol.  4: 

322,  331. 
Bredsgaard,  Ingvard  Carl,  Vol.  4:624. 
Breinholt,  Ane  S.  M.,  Vol.  2:551*. 


INDEX 


775 


Breinholt,  Jens  P.  L.,  Vol.  2:550*. 
Brenchley,  John  Clegg,  Vol.  4:487. 
Brewer,  Albert  Jos.,  Vol.  4:618. 
Brewerton,  Chas.  Albert,  Vol.  4:530. 
Brewster,  Sheldon  R.,  Vol.  4:507. 
Bricker,  Sarah  Goff,  Vol.  2:452*. 
Bricker,  William,  Vol.  2:451*. 
Briggs,  George,  Vol.  4:469. 
Briggs,  George,  jun.,  Vol.  3:29*. 
Briggs,  Isaac,  Vol.  4:567. 
Briggs,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:79*. 
Bright,  John  Parley,  Vol.  3:323*. 
Bright,  John  Wesley,  Vol.  2:41. 
Brighton,  Robert  A.,  Vol.  3:323*. 
Brim,  Alonzo  A.,  Vol.  4:659. 
Brim,  William  Franklin,  Vol.  3:324*. 
Brimhall,  David  Davis,  Vol.  4:476. 
Brimhall,   George   Henry,   Vol.   1:714; 

Vol.  3:325*;  Vol.  4:233. 
Brimhall,  John,  Vol.  4:734. 
Brimhall,  Logan,  Vol.  4:618. 
Brimhall,  Norman  A.,  Vol.  3:29*. 
Brimhall,  Noah,  Vol.  2:597*. 
Brimley,  Richard,  Vol.  1:606*. 
Bringhurst,  Geo.  Roberts,  Vol.  4:415. 
Bringhurst,  John  Frank,  Vol.  4:504. 
Bringhurst,  Leo,  Vol.  4:678. 
Bringhurst,  Sam.  Enoch,  Vol.  4:443. 
Bringhurst,   William,   Vol.   4:504. 
Bringhurst,  Wm.  Augustus,  Vol.  4:678. 
Brinkerhoff,  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:459. 
Brinkerhoff,  David,  Vol.  4:618. 
BrinkerhoflF,  Geo.  Cutler,  Vol.  4:662. 
Brinkerhoff,  James,  Vol.  3:327. 
Brinton,  David,  Vol.  4:85. 
Brinton,  David  Branson,  Vol.  4:443. 
Brinton,  David  B.,  jun..  Vol.  4:443. 
British  Mission,  Vol.  4:311-322. 
Brixen,  Julia  M.,  Vol.  4:254. 
Broadbent,  David  Albert,  Vol.  4:659. 
Broadbent,  Reuben,  Vol.  2:129*. 
Broadbent,  William,  Vol.  4:305-306. 
Broadbent,  Wm.  Francis,  Vol.  4:543. 
Brockbank,  Hazel  Agnes,  Vol.  4:254. 
Brockbank,  Wells  Thos.,  Vol.  4:568. 
Bromley,  William  M.,  Vol.  2:24*;  Vol. 

4:306*. 
Bronson,  Clark,  Vol.  4:659. 
Bronson,  Clinton  Doneral,  Vol.  4:734. 
Bronson,  Henry  D.,  Vol.  3:607. 
Brooks,  George  Finly,  Vol.  2:99*. 
Brossard,  Edgar  Bernard,  Vol.  4:335*. 
Brough,  Harold  Eugene,  Vol.  4:16*. 
Brough,  Samuel  R.,  Vol.  2:256*. 
Brower,  Joshua  Albert,  Vol.  4:637. 
Brown,  Adin  Ebed,  Vol.  2:255,  811*. 
Brown,  Albert  George,  Vol.  2:598*. 
Brown,  Alexander,  Vol.  3:608. 
Brown,  Arthur  Chas.,  Vol.  4:527. 
Brown,  Austin  Cravath,  Vol.  2:282*. 
Brown,  Austin  Milton,  Vol.  2:438*. 
Brown,  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:595. 
Brown,  Ebenezer,  Vol.  3:608. 
Brown,  Elisha,  Vol.  3:328. 
Brown,  Fannie  S.,  Vol.  2:439*. 


Brown,  Francis  A.,  Vol.  4:350*. 
Brown,  Frank  Lester,  Vol.  4:734. 
Brown,  George  W.,  Vol.  3:608*,  694. 
Brown,  Harriet  Canfield,  Vol.  4:180. 
Brown,  Henry  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:469. 
Brown,  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:671. 
Brown,  James  (of  Ogden),  Vol.  2:283*. 
Brown,  James   (of  Woodruff),  Vol.  4: 

16*. 
Brown,  James  (of  Bountiful),  Vol.  4: 

735. 
Brown,  James,  jun.,  Vol.  4:669. 
Brown,  James  Christensen,  Vol.  4:17*. 
Brown,  James  Cross,  Vol.  4:119*. 
Brown,  James  M.,  Vol.  2:243.     -' 
Brown,   James   Stephens,   Vol.   3:30*; 

Vol.  4:375. 
Brown,  John,  Vol.  1:511;  Vol.  4:694. 
Brown,  John  W.,  Vol.  4:595. 
Brown,  Jos.  Smith,  jun..  Vol.  4:505. 
Brown,  Lorenzo  John,  Vol.  4:595. 
Brown,  Mahonri  E.,  Vol.  3:328. 
Brown,  Moroni  Franklin,  Vol.  4:665. 
Brown,  Nathaniel  Thomas,  Vol.  4:695. 
Brown,  Richard  Roy  D.,  Vol.  4:553. 
Brown,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:598. 
Brown,  Scott  B.,  Vol.  4:423. 
Brown,   William,  Vol.   1:466*. 
Brown,  Wm.  Geo.,  Vol.  4:483. 
Brownell,  Gideon,  Vol.  4:621. 
Browning,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:50. 
Browning,  George  E.,  Vol.  3:329*;  Vol. 

4:366. 
Browning,  Norma  Fenton,  Vol.  4:276. 
Browning,  Thos.  Sam.,  Vol.  4:507. 
Brugger,  Arnold,  Vol.  3:609. 
Brunson,  Lewis,  Vol.  3:330*. 
Brunson,  Peter  Lorenzo,  Vol.  3:330. 
Brunson,  Seymour,  Vol.  3:331. 
Brunt,  Jos.  Alfred,  Vol.  4:494. 
Bryan,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  4:496. 
Bryan,  Geo.  W.,  Vol.  4:646. 
Bryan,  John  Carver,  Vol.  4:646. 
Bryan,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:646. 
Bryce,  Alma  Nephi,  Vol.  4:599. 
Bryner,   Casper,   Vol.   1:535. 
Buchanan,  Alexander,  Vol.  2:440*. 
Buchanan,  Ezra  Sylvester,  Vol.  4:418. 
Buchanan,  Osmond,  Vol.  4:418. 
Buck,  William  Foulds,  Vol.  2:285*. 
Buckley,  Edmund,  Vol.  2:178*. 
Buckwalter,  Henry  S.,  Vol.  1:604*. 
Buckwalter,  Calvin  S.,  Vol.  1:603*. 
Budge,  Oliver  H.,  Vol.  4:436,  438,  511. 
Budge,  William,  Vol.   1:451*;   Vol.  4: 

312*    511 
Budge,' Will'iam  Arthur,  Vol.  3:332. 
Buehler,  John  Ulrich,  Vol.  2:14. 
Buehner,  Lucille  Thurman,  Vol.  4:255. 
Bulkley,  Newman,  Vol.  3:610. 
Bull,  Joseph,  Vol.  1:653*. 
Bullock,  Benjamin  H.,  Vol.  4:656. 
Bullock,  Lucy  Clayton,  Vol.  2:600*. 
Bullock,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:599*;  Vol.  4: 
695. 


776 


INDEX 


Bunker,  Bryan  Lamond,  Vol.  4:531. 
Bunker,  Edward,  Vol.  3:31*. 
Bunker,  Edward,  jun..  Vol.  4:531. 
Bunker,  John  Mathieson,  Vol.  4:531. 
Bunnell,  Stephen  I.,  Vol.  2:600*. 
Bunting,  Harriet  D.,  Vol.  4:181. 
Bunting,  James  Lovett,  Vol.  3:33*. 
Burbidge,  Geo.  E.,  Vol.  4:725. 
Burbidge,  Geo.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:376. 
Burch,  James,  Vol.  2:242*. 
Burdette,  Burdette  P.,  Vol.  3:610. 
Bui'gess,  Edward  W.,  Vol.  4:18. 
Burgess,  Ernest  Hungate,  Vol.  4:589. 
Burgess,  Harrison,  Vol.  4:687. 
Burgner,  John  J.,  Vol.  4:637. 
Burgon,  Heber  James,  Vol.  4:19. 
Burgon,  Willard  C,  Vol.  1:588*. 
Burgoyne,  Edward  L.,  Vol.  2:35*. 
Burgoyne,  Sidney  Eynon,  Vol.  4:533. 
Burk,  Chas.  Allen,  Vol.  4:695. 
Burk,  Jos.  Spencer,  Vol.  4:595. 
Burk,  Wm.  Isaiah,  Vol.  4:596. 
Burley  Stake,  Vol.  4:432-435. 
Burnham,  Euphemia  J.  I.,  Vol.  4:276. 
Burnham,  Jacob,  Vol.  4:695. 
Burnham,  James,  Vol.  3:611. 
Burnham,  Wallace  K.,  Vol.  2:42*. 
Burns,  James  Edward,  Vol.  4:735. 
Burns,  William  Josiah,  Vol.  3:34*. 
Burnside,  Alexander,  Vol.  3:332*. 
Burr,  Gilbert  Morse,  Vol.  4:551. 
Burraston,  John,  Vol.  2:347*. 
Burridge,  Geo.  Wilcox,  Vol.  4:646. 
Burrows,  James  Bascom,  Vol.  3:332*. 
Burrows,  John  Holmes,  Vol.  2:522*. 
Burt,  Albert  Cleon,  Vol.  3:611. 
Burt,  Andrew  Hill,  Vol.  4:464. 
Burt,  Chas.  W.,  Vol.  4:392. 
Burt,  David  Patterson,  Vol.  4:426. 
Burt,  John  Davidson,  Vol.  2:61*. 
Burt,  Keith  Wynder,  Vol.  4:735. 
Burtenshaw,  Wm.  Francis,  Vol.  4:494. 
Burton,  Alma  Gardner,  Vol.  4:375. 
Burton,  Arthur  Fielding,  Vol.  3:35. 
Burton,  Austin  Garr,  Vol.  4:454. 
Burton,  Carl  Cushing,  Vol.  4:476. 
Burton,  Charles  S.,  Vol.  1:671*. 
Burton,  Ira  Junius,  Vol.  4:446. 
Burton,  Henry  Fielding,  Vol.  4:479. 
Burton,  James  Edward,  Vol.  4:121. 
Burton,  Mary  I.  F.  Young,  Vol.  4:276. 
Burton,  Robert  I.,  Vol.  4:19,  541. 
Burton,  Robert  T.,  Vol.  1:238*;  Vol.  3: 

746. 
Burton,  Thomas  F.,  Vol.  2:227*. 
Burton,  Thomas  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:121*. 
Burton,  Willard  C,  Vol.  4:726. 
Burton,  William  G.,  Vol.  2:255*. 
Burton,   William   Walton,  Vol.   1:349; 

Vol.  2:226*. 
Busenbark,  Leland  J.,  Vol.  4:662. 
Bush,  Hannah  M.  Green,  Vol.  3:37*. 
Bush,  Richard,  Vol.  3:35. 
Bush,  Richard  Nelson,  Vol.  3:36*. 
Bushman,  Elias  Albert,  Vol.  2:284*. 


Bushman,  Homer  Fred,  Vol.  2:601. 
Bushman,  John,  Vol.  1:553*. 
Bushman,  Lewis  Jacob,  Vol.  3:611. 
Bushman,  Martin  B.,  Vol.  1:507. 
Bushman,  Preston  A.,  Vol.  2:601. 
Bushnell,  Daniel  Dearden,  Vol.  4:527. 
Butler,  Albert  Nathan,  Vol.  4:637. 
Butler,  Alva,  Vol.  1:578;  Vol.  2:312*. 
Butler,  Alva  John,  Vol.  2:312*. 
Butler,  Ernest  Leroy,  Vol.  4:366,  479. 
Butler,  Henry,  Vol.  2:601. 
Butler,  Henry  L.,  Vol.  4:676. 
Butler,  Job,  Vol.  2:359. 
Butler,  John  Low,  Vol.  2:601. 
Butler,  John  Lowe,  Vol.  4:530. 
Butler,  Rufus   Edgar,  Vol.  3:38*. 
Butler,  Sarah  Adeline,  Vol.  3:38*. 
Butler,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:612. 
Butler,  Thomas  L.,  Vol.  2:359. 
Butler,  William  H.,  Vol.  3:612. 
Butterfield,  Almon  T.,  Vol.  2:315*;  Vol. 

4:20*. 
Butterfield,  Josiah,  Vol.  1:192. 
Butterfield,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:583*. 
Butterfield,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:582*. 
Butterfield,  Thomas,  jun.,  Vol.  1:582*. 
Butterworth,  Isaiah,  Vol.  4:627. 
Butterworth,  John  A.,  Vol.  4:350*. 
Buttle,  Joseph  Acomb,  Vol.  2:749*. 
Buxton,  John  M.,  Vol.  4:637. 
Bybee,  David  B.,  Vol.  4:541. 
Bybee,  Robert  Lee,  Vol.  2:601. 
Byington,  Chas.  Norton,  Vol.  4:579, 
Bywater,  George  G.,  Vol.  2:602*. 
Bywater,  Henry  G.,  Vol.  2:604*. 


Cache  Stake,  Vol.  4:435-437. 
Cahoon,  Andrew,  Vol.  4:443. 
Cahoon,  Geo.  Edward,  Vol.  4:392. 
Cahoon,  Hyrum  Spencer,  Vol.  4:450. 
Cahoon,  Jay  Alder,  Vol.  4:389. 
Cahoon,  Matilda  Watts,  Vol.  4:276. 
Cahoon,  Wm.  F.,  Vol.  4:687. 
Cain,  Elizabeth  W.,  Vol.  2:751*. 
Cain,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:750*. 
Cain,  Mabel  M.  M.  Cooper,  Vol.  4:255. 
Caine,  Fred  A.,  Vol.  4:494. 
Caine,  John  T.,  Vol.  1:726*. 
Caine,  Margaret  A.,  Vol.  4:181. 
Calder,  David  O.,  Vol.  1:773*. 
Calder,  Hyrum  Bennion,  Vol.  4:651. 
Calder,  Robert,  Vol.  4:400. 
Caldwell,  David  Henry,  Vol.  4:646. 
Caldwell,  Jos.  Edwin,  jun.,  Vol.  4:460. 
Caldwell,  Lillian  E.  NeflT,  Vol.  4:255. 
Caldwell,  Matthew,  Vol.  4:735. 
Caldwell,  Thos.  Jefferson,  sen..  Vol.  4: 

651. 
Caldwell,  Thos.  Jefferson,  jun..  Vol.  4: 

651. 
California  Mission,  Vol.  4:322-324. 
Calkin,  Asa,  Vol.  4:312. 
Call,  Anson,  Vol.  4:621. 
Call,  Anson   Bowen,  Vol.   4:499. 
Call,  Anson  C,  Vol.  2:258*. 


INDEX 


777 


Call,  Anson  Vasco   (missionary),  Vol. 

3:612. 
Call,  Anson  Vasco  (president),  Vol.  2: 

751*. 
Call,  Christian,  Vol.  3:333. 
Call,  Christian  Joseph,  Vol.  4:627. 
Call,  Elbert  Vanson,  Vol.  4:419. 
Call,  Irvin,  Vol.  4:548. 
Call,  Israel,  Vol.  4:122*. 
Call,  Ivan,  Vol.  4:21. 
Call,  John  Omer,  Vol.  4:585. 
Call,  Joseph  Clarence,  Vol.  4:123. 
Call,  Josiah,  Vol.  3:38*. 
Callahan,  William  H.,  Vol.  3:333*. 
Callan,  Stephen  James,  Vol.  3:334, 
Callis,  Charles  A.,  Vol.  4:380*. 
Callister,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:527. 
Callister,   Thos.   C.    (Bishop),  Vol.   1: 

528*. 
Callister,  Thos.  C.  (president).  Vol.  4: 

124*,  528. 
Cameron,  Allen,  Vol.  4:625. 
Cameron,  Benjamin,  Vol.  3:39*. 
Cameron,  David,  Vol.  1:542,  821*. 
Cameron,  Jonathan  Wm.,  Vol.  4:662. 
Cameron,  Sarah  E.,  Vol.  3:40*. 
Cammock,  Francis,  Vol.  4:517. 
Campbell,  Agnes,  Vol.  4:255. 
Campbell,  Archibald,  Vol.  4:618. 
Campbell,  Fred.  Henry,  Vol.  4:579. 
Campbell,  Joan  M.,  Vol.  4:256. 

Campbell,  Jonathan,  Vol.  1:398*;  Vol. 
4:736. 

Campbell,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:512. 

Campbell,  Robert  Lang,  Vol.  3:613*. 

Campbell,  Wallace,  Vol.  4:585. 

Campbell,  Wm.  D.,  Vol.  4:546. 

Canadian  Mission,  Vol.  4:324-325. 

Canfield,  Rosalthe  (Rose),  Vol.  4:277. 

Cannon,  Abraham  H.,  Vol.  1:167*. 

Cannon,  Angus  J.,  Vol.  4:387. 

Cannon,  Angus  M.,  Vol.  1:292*. 

Cannon,  Ann  M.,  Vol.  4:256. 

Cannon,  Annie  Wells,  Vol.  3:334;  Vol. 
4:181. 

Cannon,  Carl  John,  Vol.  1:450*. 

Cannon,  Clara  C.  M.,  Vol.  4:277*. 

Cannon,  Clawson  Young,  Vol.  4:656. 

Cannon,  David  Hoagland,  Vol.  3:614. 

Cannon,  George  J.,  Vol.  4:21,  233*. 

Cannon,  George  M.,  Vol.  1:566*;  Vol. 
4:206*. 

Cannon,  Geoi'ge  Q.,  Vol.  1:42*;  Vol.  4: 
313*,  322. 

Cannon,  Hugh  Jenne,  Vol.  4:233,  507. 

Cannon,  Ira  Bennion,  Vol.  4:454. 

Cannon,  John  M.,  Vol.  1:790*. 

Cannon,  John  Quayle,  Vol.  1:243;  Vol. 
4:387. 

Cannon,  Lester  Jenkins,  Vol.  3:615. 

Cannon,  Lewis  M.,  Vol.  1:687. 

Cannon,  Lewis  Telle,  Vol.  4:233. 

Cannon,  Lucy  Grant,  Vol.  4:256*. 

Cannon,  Martha  A.  Brown,  Vol.  4:182. 

Cannon,  Martha  H.  (Dr.),  Vol.  4:86*. 


Cannon,  Martha  Telle,  Vol.  2:524*. 
Cannon,  Sarah  E.  Richards,  Vol.  4:257. 
Cannon,  Sarah  J.  J.,  Vol.  2:605;  Vol. 

4:182*. 
Cannon,  Sylvester  Q.,  Vol.  4:351*,  726, 

736*. 
Cannon,  Tracy  Y.,  Vol.  4:207*,  574. 
Cannon,  Walter,  Vol.  4:592. 
Cannon,  Willard  Telle,  Vol.  4:351*. 
Cannon,  Wm.  Telle,  Vol.  4:351*,  507. 
Capell,  Jos.  Edward,  Vol.  4:579. 
Capener,  Arthur  Rigby,  Vol.  3:42*. 
Capener,  Ella  Smith,  Vol.  4:277. 
Capener,  Russell  Cleveland,  Vol.  4:22. 
Capson,  Albert  A.,  Vol.  3:336. 
Capson,  Carl  Johan,  Vol.  3:336*. 
Capson,  Nils,  Vol.  3:337. 
Carbine,  Edmund  Z.,  Vol.  4:671. 
Carbine,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:671. 
Carbine,  Wm.  Van  Orden,  Vol.  3:40*. 
Carbon  Stake,  Vol.  4:437-439. 
Card,  Charles  O.,  Vol.  r:296*. 
Card,  Zina  Y.,  Vol.  3:338*;  Vol.  4:278. 
Cardon,  John  Roy,  Vol.  4:576. 
Cardon,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  1:413*. 
Cardon,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  2:126*. 
Cardon,  Louis  S.,  Vol.  1:420*;  Vol.  4: 

385. 
Cardon,  Lucy  Smith,  Vol.  4:182. 
Cardon,  Paul,  Vol.  2:76. 
Careless,  Jane  Davis,  Vol.  4:278. 
Careless,  George  E.  P.,  Vol.  1:738*. 
Carlile,  Frederick  Giles,  Vol.  4:659. 
Carlisle,  John  Edward,  Vol.  2:752. 

Carlquist,  Carl  A.,  Vol.  2:422*;  Vol.  4: 
369*. 

Carlson,  Anders  Alfred,  Vol.  3:41*. 

Carlson,  August  W.,  Vol.  4:368*. 

Carlson,  Carl  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:466. 

Carlson,  Oscar  Wm.,  Vol.  4:233. 

Carlton,  Hiram  Cash,  Vol.  4:415. 

Carpenter,  Ann  E.  H.,  Vol.  3:43*. 

Carpenter,  Erastus  S.,  Vol.  2:196. 

Carpenter,  John  S.,  Vol.  3:42*. 

Carpenter,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  2:561*. 

Carr,  Chas.  Clyde,  Vol.  4:606. 

Carr,  Edwin  Myron,  Vol.  4:585. 

Carrigan,  James,  Vol.  4:537. 

Carrigan,  James  Wm.,  Vol.  4:537. 

Carrington,  Albert,  Vol.   1:126*;  Vol. 
4:313*   695. 

Carroll,  Edward,  Vol.  4:502. 

Carruth,  John  E.,  Vol.  4:537. 

Carter,  Alof  Peter,  Vol.  4:599. 

Carter,  Charles  Byron,  Vol.  4:437. 

Carter,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:23,  537. 

Carter,  Geo.  Edward,  Vol.  4:537. 

Carter,  Gideon  Haden,  Vol.  3:615. 

Carter,  Hyrum,  Vol.  3:616. 

Carter,  Isaac  Philo,  Vol.  4:737. 

Carter,  Lucy  M.  Smith,  Vol.  4:257. 

Carter,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:538. 

Carter,  William,  Vol.  4:695. 

Cartwright,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  3:616. 

Carver,  Geo.  H.,  Vol.  4:561. 


778 


INDEX 


Carver,  John,  Vol.  2:284*. 
Carver,  Parley  Pratt,  Vol.  4:561. 
Case,  Frederick  Earl,  Vol.  4:454. 
Case,  James,  Vol.  4:696. 
Casper,  Jedediah  Grant,  Vol.  2:752*. 
Casper,  Wm.  Wallace,  Vol.  4:737. 
Cassia  Stake,  Vol.  4:439-442. 
Casto,  Santa  Anna,  Vol.  4:443. 
Casto,  William  W.,  Vol.  4:738. 
Cazier,  Charles  Drake,  Vol.  3:340. 
Cazier,  David,  Vol.  2:115*. 
Central  States  Mission,  Vol.  4:325-326. 
Chadwick,  James,  Vol  4:466. 
Chaffin,  Carlyle,  Vol.  4:494. 
Chamberlain,  Henry,  Vol.  3:44*. 
Chamberlain,  Israel  H.,  Vol.  4:502. 
Chamberlain,  Solomon,  Vol.  2:605;  Vol. 

4:696. 
Chamberlain,   Thos.    (Patriarch),  Vol. 

3:44*. 
Chamberlain  Thos.  (Arco  Ward),  Vol. 

4:517. 
Chamberlain,  Wm.  H.,  Vol.  4:376. 
Chambers,  Edward  Holroyd,  Vol.  4:23. 
Chambers,  Mary  L.  S.,  Vol.  2:524*. 
Chambers,  Nathaniel  G.,  Vol.  2:523*. 
Chandler,  James  J.,  Vol.  2:261. 
Chapin,  Uriah  Calvin,  Vol.  3:341*. 
Chappellj  Geo.  Armstrong,  Vol.  4:662. 
Chase,  John  Darwin,  Vol.  4:623,  738. 
Chatwin,  Thomas  Edwin,  Vol.  4:644. 
Chatwin,  Wm.  Albert,  Vol.  4:543. 
Cheever,  Geo.  A.  Smith,  Vol.  4:544. 
Cheney,  David  Pierce,  Vol.  4:483,  515. 
Cheney,  Leo.  H.,  Vol.  4:606. 
Cheney,  Nathan  Beebe,  Vol.  2:62*. 
Cheney,  Zaccheus,  Vol.  4:739. 
Cherry,  Jesse  Yelton,  Vol.  3:616. 
Chesley,  Alex.  Philip,  Vol.  4:696. 
Chidester,  John  Maddison,  Vol.  4:688. 
Chidester,  John  Peck,  Vol.  4:688. 
Child,  George  Newport,  Vol.  4:88* 
Child,  John,  Vol.  4:665. 
Child,  Julia  Alleman,  Vol.  4:182. 
Child,  Paul  Curtis,  Vol.  4:575. 
Child,  Thos.  Battersby,  jun..  Vol.  4:23*. 
Chipman,  Otto  Lyman,  Vol.  3:341. 
Chipman,  Stephen  L.,  Vol.  3:342. 
Chipman,  Washburn,  Vol.  1 :505. 
Choules,  Albert,  Vol.  4:637. 
Christensen,  Andrew,  Vol.  2:576*. 
Christensen,  Anthon  C,  Vol.  2:146. 
Christensen,  Antone  C,  Vol.  3:343. 
Christensen,  Arnfred  J.,  Vol.  2:606*. 
Christensen,  Carl  C.  A.,  Vol.  1:378*. 
Christensen,  Casper,  Vol.  4:460. 
Christensen,  Christen,  Vol.  2:163*. 
Christensen,  Christen  N.,  Vol.  4:125*. 
Christensen,  Christian,  Vol.  2:753*. 
Christensen,  Christian  F.,  Vol.  4:528. 
Christensen,  Christian  M.,  Vol.  4:397. 
Christensen,  David  H.,  Vol.  1:788*. 
Christensen,  Erastus  M.,  Vol.  4:615. 
Christensen,  Erastus  Snow,  Vol.  4:609. 


Christensen,  F.  W.,  Vol.  2:544*. 
Christensen,  Frederik,  Vol.  4:432. 
Christensen,    Geo.    (Kamas),   Vol.    4: 

630. 
Christensen,  Geo.  (Mission  President), 

Vol.  1:370*;  Vol.  4:369*. 
Christensen,  Hannibal  L.,  Vol.  3:617. 
Christensen,  Heber  C,  Vol.  2:753, 
Christensen,  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:481. 
Christensen,  James  A.,  Vol.  2:606*. 
Christensen,  James  G.,  Vol.  4:487. 
Christensen,  J.  M.,  jun..  Vol.  2:166*. 
Christensen,   James    M.,   Vol.    1:686*; 

Vol.  4:328*.  > — - 

Christensen,  James  P.  (Elwood),  Vol. 

2:68*.  L 

Christensen,  James   P.    (Salem),  Vol. 

2:356*. 
Christensen,   John,   Vol.   2:607*. 
Christensen,  Joseph   (Gunnison),  Vol. 

2:745. 
Christensen,  Joseph    (Recorder),  Vol. 

4:681*. 
Christensen,  Lars  Peter,  Vol.  2:210*. 
Christensen,  Lorenzo  H.,  Vol.  4:450. 
Christensen,  Mads,  Vol.  3:45*. 
Christensen,  Martin  Elmer,  Vol.  4:234. 
Christensen,  Niels,  Vol.  3:46*. 
Christensen,  Niels  C.  (Hyrum),  Vol.  3 

46. 
Christensen,  Niels  C.  (Salem),  Vol.  2 

356*. 
Christensen,    Olive    Derbidge,    Vol.   4 

89*,  182,  278. 
Christensen,  P.  Rulon,  Vol.  4:335. 
Christensen,   Simon,  Vol.   2:753*. 
Christensen,  Thomas  C,  Vol.  2:164*. 
Christensen,  Wilford  M.,  Vol.  2:56. 
Christenson,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:607*. 
Christiansen,  C.  H.,  Vol.  2:543*. 
Christiansen,  C.  J.,  Vol.  2:577*. 
Christiansen,  F.  J.,  Vol.  2:569*. 
Christiansen,  F.  J.,  jun..  Vol.  2:570*. 
Christiansen,  Hans  C,  Vol.  1:396*. 
Christiansen,  Hans  J.,  Vol.  2:201*;  Vol. 

4:329*. 
Christiansen,  Hans  Peter,  Vol.  4:419. 
Christiansen,  James,  Vol.  2:754*. 
Christiansen,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:369. 
Christiansen,  Lars  Peter,  Vol.  4:487. 
Christiansen,  Leonard,  Vol.  4:423. 
Christiansen,  Parley,  Vol.  1:817*. 
Christiansen,  Peter  S.,  Vol.  4:739*. 
Christiansen,  Soren,  Vol.  2:608*. 
Christoffersen,  John,  Vol.  4:637. 
Christoffersen,  Peter  J.,  Vol.  4:596. 
Christofferson,  Moses,  Vol.  4:412. 
Christophersen,  Chris.  W.,  Vol.  3:617. 
Christophersen,    Martin,   Vol.   3:617*; 

Vol.  4:329*,  365. 
Christophersen,  Rasmus,  Vol.  2:262*. 
Chugg,  Moroni,  Vol.  3:47. 
Chugg,  Nathaniel  B.,  Vol.  4:487. 
Church,  Haden  Wells,  Vol.  3:618. 
Clapp,  Benjamin  L.,  Vol.  1:195. 


INDEX 


779 


Claridge,  David  Harmon,  Vol.  4:599. 
Claridge,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:47*. 
Clark,  Amasa  Lyman,  Vol.  3:344. 
Clark,  Arthur  Raymond,  Vol.  4:627. 
Clark,  Chas.  S.,  Vol.  4:440. 
Clark,  Edward  Barrett,  Vol.  3:48*. 
Clark,  Ezra  James,  Vol.  3:345*. 
Clark,  Ezra  Thompson,  Vol.  3:343*. 
Clark,  George  Hammond,  Vol.  2:116. 
Clark,  George  Scheffer,  Vol.  2:25*. 
Clark,  Hiram,  Vol.  4:339. 
Clark,  James  Cecil,  Vol.  2:755;  808*. 
Clark,  James  Henry,  Vol.  4:613. 
Clark,  John  (Salt  Lake  Stake),  Vol.  1: 

775*. 
Clark,  John  (Upton),  Vol.  4:630. 
Clark,  John  Alexander,  Vol.  3:346*. 
Clark,  John  H.,  Vol.  1:444. 
Clark,  John  W.,  Vol.  1:548*. 
Clark,  Joseph  Smith  (High  Councilor), 

Vol.  3:347. 
Clark,    Joseph    Smith     (of    Fielding), 

Vol.  4:405. 
Clark,  Joshua  Reuben,  Vol.  3:49*;  Vol. 

4:362. 
Clark,  Lawrence  D.,  Vol.  4:576. 
Clark,  Leigh  Wm.,  Vol.  4:524. 
Clark,  Parley  James,  Vol.  4:559. 
Clark,  Riley  Garner,  Vol.  4:739. 
Clark,  Samuel  Thomas,  Vol.  3:619. 
Clark,  Thomas   H.,  Vol.   1:547*. 
Clark,  Walter  Edward,  Vol.  4:533. 
Clark,  Wilford  W.,  Vol.  2:35*. 
Clark,  William  H.,  Vol.  2:756*. 
Clarke,  James  Hill,  Vol.  2:755*. 
Clarke,  Peter  Drew,  Vol.  4:506. 
Clawson,  Edwin,  Vol.  4:487. 
Clawson,  Hiram  B.,  Vol.  1:629*. 
Clawson,  Louis  Wayne,  Vol.  4:596. 
Clawson,  Rudger,  Vol.  1:174*;  Vol.  4: 

234,  313*. 
Clawson,  Thomas  A.,  Vol.  2:100*;  Vol. 

4:234. 
Clawson,  Vida  Fox,  Vol.  4:257. 
Clayson,  Eli  James,  Vol.  4:126*. 
Clayson,  William  A.,  Vol.  3:619. 
Clayton,  Alma  Carlos,  Vol.  4:234. 
Clayton,  Cornelia  Home,  Vol.  4:278. 
Clayton,  Hugh,  Vol.  4:656. 
Clayton,  John,  Vol.  4:508. 
Clayton,  Raymond  H.,  Vol.  4:544. 
Clayton,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:757*. 
Clayton,  Wm.,  Vol.  1:717*;  Vol.  4:696. 
Clegg,  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:24. 
Clegg,  Henry,  Vol.  4:659. 
Clegg,  Robt.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:397. 
Clegg,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:476. 
Clements,  Ada,  Vol.  4:688. 
Clements,  Albert,  Vol.  4:688. 
Clements,  Albert  N.,  Vol.  1:448*. 
Cleveland,  Sarah  Marietta,  Vol.  4:183. 
Clifford,  Thomas  Holman,  Vol.  3:50*. 
Clifford,  see  Wriston. 
Clinger,  John  Williams,  Vol.  4:585. 
Clinger,  Marion,  Vol.  4:419. 


Cloward,  Thomas  P.,  Vol.  4:696. 

Cluff,  Benjamin,  Vol.  1:475*. 

Cluff,  Harvey  H.,  Vol.  1:371*;  Vol.  4: 

339*. 
Cluff,  Henry,  Vol.  1:477*. 
Cluff,  James,  Vol.  4:599. 
Cluff,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:599. 
Cluff,  Leonard  Bruce,  Vol.  4:575. 
Cluff,  Sidney  Hamer,  Vol.  4:613. 
Cluff,  William  W.,  Vol.  1:340*;  Vol.  4: 

369*. 
Clyde,  Edward  D.,  Vol.  2:10*. 
Coalter,  Fergus,  Vol.  3:347. 
Cobb,  Camilla  C.  Meith,  Vol.  4:279. 
Cobbley,  James,  Vol.  4:643. 
Cobbley,  James  David  O.,  Vol.  4:419. 
Cockerill,  Alice  R.,  Vol.  2:447*. 
Cockerill,  Anthony,  Vol.  2:446*. 
Coffin,  Nathan  Samuel,  Vol.  3:348;  Vol. 

4:579. 
Coffin,  Wm.  A.,  Vol.  4:579. 
Colby,  Alanson,  Vol.  4:688. 
Cole,  Charles,  Vol.  4:506. 
Cole,  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  3:619. 
Colebrook,   Charles,  Vol.  2:292*. 
Coleman,  George,  Vol.  1:526*. 
Coleman,  Geo.  Smith,  Vol.  4:662. 
Coleman,  Henry  T.,  Vol.  3:51*. 
Collett,  Sylvester  D.,  Vol.  3:620. 
Collings,  James  Wesley,  Vol.  4:576. 
Collings,  John,  Vol.  4:515. 
Colorado  Mission,  Vol.  4:325-326. 
Colton,  Byron  Owen,  Vol.  4:127. 
Colton,  Don  B.,  Vol.  4:651. 
Colton,  Sterling  Driggs,  Vol.  4:652. 
Coltrin,  Zebedee,  Vol.  1:190;  Vol.  4:697. 
Colvin,  Lachonius  Moroni,  Vol.  4:599. 
Colvin,  Levi  A.,  Vol.  4:613. 
Comer,  George,  Vol.  1:794*. 
Compton,  Allen,  Vol.  4:740. 
Condie,  John  William,  Vol.  3:349. 
Condie,  Parley  M.,  Vol.  4:561. 
Condie,  Thomas  A.,  Vol.  3:53*. 
Conley,  John  Franklin,  Vol.  4:519. 
Connelly,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:644. 
Conrad,  Carl  Kunz,  Vol.  4:25. 
Cook,  Amos  Roy,  Vol.  4:548. 
Cook,  Clarence,  Vol.  4:401. 
Cook,  David,  Vol.  3:51*. 
Cook,  David  S.,  Vol.  4:541. 
Cook,  Edwin  C,  Vol.  4:517. 
Cook,  Geo.  H.,  Vol.  4:494. 
Cook,  Henry  Freeman,  Vol.  4:505. 
Cook,  Hyrum  H.,  Vol.  2:47*. 
Cook,  James  Moores,  Vol.  4:469. 
Cook,  John  W.  (Taylor),  Vol.  4:615. 
Cook,  John  Wm.  (Southgate),  Vol.  4: 

479. 
Cook,  Joshua  Holden,  Vol.  4:662. 
Cook,  Mary  E.  N.,  Vol.  2:758*. 
Cook,  Phineas  Woolcott,  Vol.  3:52*. 
Cook,  Samuel,   Vol.   3:348*. 
Cook,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:757*. 
Cook,  Washington  N.,  Vol.  3:620;  Vol. 

4:344. 


780 


INDEX 


Cook,  William,  Vol.  3:349. 
Cooley,  Andrew  Wood,  Vol.  3:350*. 
Coombs,  Ephraim,  Vol.  4:609. 
Coombs,  Isaiah  M.,  Vol.  1:495*. 
Coombs,  Mark  Vernon,  Vol.  4:389. 
Coon,  Isaac  William,  Vol.  4:90*. 
Coon,  James  D.,  Vol.  2:448*. 
Coon,  John,  Vol.  2:758*. 
Coon,  Mary  H.,  Vol.  2:449,  810*. 
Coon,  Mary  T.  Y.,  Vol.  2:759*. 
Coons,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:210. 
Coons,  Libeus  T.,  Vol.  4:689. 
Cooper,  Eliza  Ward,  Vol.  2:610*. 
Cooper,  John  (Fillmore),  Vol.  2:144*; 

Vol.  3:351. 
Cooper,  John  (Sterling),  Vol.  4:419. 
Cooper,  Joseph  Parker,  Vol.  3:351. 
Cooper,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:609^ 
Cope,  Francis,  Vol.  3:54*. 
Copening,  Frank  L.,  Vol.  4:464. 
Copley,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:260*. 
Corbett,  Joseph  Fred.,  Vol.  4:491. 
Corbett,  Pearson  H.,  Vol.  4:644. 
Corbett,  William,  Vol.  4:397. 
Corbitt,  Marion  Leroy,  Vol.  4:26,  630. 
Corbridge,  James  Heber,  Vol.  4:466. 
Corbridge,  John  T.,  Vol.  4:483. 
Corbridge,  Samuel  Ray,  Vol.  3:352*. 
Cordon,  Alfred,  Vol.  4:426. 
Cordon,  Geo.  Albert,  Vol.  4:585. 
Cordon,  Omer  Samuel,  Vol.  3:352. 
Cordon,  Ralph  Roland,  Vol.  4:637. 
Cordon,  Voss  Christian,  Vol.  4:637. 
Cornwall,  Alma  Millen,  Vol.  4:443. 
Cornwall,  Claude  C,  Vol.  4:234. 
Cornwall,  J.  Spencer,  Vol.  4:234*. 
Cornwall,  Joseph  Alex.,  Vol.  4:443. 
Cornwall,   Lenore,  Vol.   4:279. 
Corrill,  John,  Vol.  1:241. 
Corry,  Elias  Moroni,  Vol.  4:572. 
Corry,  William  Henry,  Vol.  3:352*. 
Cottam,  Thomas  P.,  Vol.  3:353. 
Cottle,  Walter,  Vol.  4:447. 
Cottonwood  Stake,  Vol.  4:442-446. 
Cottrell,  Charles,  jun.,  Vol.  4:575. 
Court,  Thomas  Samuel,  Vol.  4:366. 
Covey,  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:464. 
Covington,  Jos.  W.,  Vol.  4:483,  515. 
Covington,  Robt.  D.,  Vol.  4:592. 
Cowan,  Peter  Burt,  Vol.  4:496. 
Cowdery,  Oliver,  Vol.  1:246*. 
Cowles,  Elvira  A.  (later  Holmes),  Vol. 

4:183. 
Cowley,  Joseph  Curtis,  Vol.  3:354*. 
Cowley,  Matthias  F.,  Vol.  1:168*;  Vol. 

4:235, 
Cox,  Alvira  Coolidge,  Vol.  2:565. 
Cox,  Arthur  Ludene,  Vol.  4:460. 
Cox,  Edward  Eugene,  Vol.  4:454. 
Cox,  Edward  Isaiah,  Vol.  3:55=^. 
Cox,  Eli  Ashton,  Vol.  4:615. 
Cox,  Everard  Alvin,  Vol.  3:354*. 
Cox,  Frederick  W.,  jun..  Vol.  2:564*. 
Cox,  Orville  Sutherland,  Vol.  4:621. 
Cox,  Solomon  L.,  jun..  Vol.  4:483. 


Cox,  Thomas  Levis,  Vol.  2:190*. 
Cox,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:565*. 
Cox,  William  James,  Vol.  2:287*. 
Crabtree,  Chas.  Sam.,  Vol.  4:494. 
Craig,  James,  Vol.  4:697. 
Cramer,  Eric  Adolph,  Vol.  4:652. 
Crandall,  Harvey  Leslie,  Vol.  4:637. 
Crandall,  Hyrum  Oscar,  Vol.  4:637. 
Crane,  Franklin  Thos.,  Vol.  4:667, 
CTane,  James,  Vol.  1:579*. 
Crane,  James  S.,  Vol.  1:580*. 
Cranney,  Wilbur  Thomas,  Vol.  4:440, 
Cranney,  Willard  Duane,  Vol.  4:436, 
Crapo,  Charles  C,  Vol.  2:109*. 
Crawford,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:678. 
Cl-awford,  Jane  V.  Romney,  Vol.  4:279. 
Crawford,  John,  Vol.  1:391*. 
Crawford,  William  R.,  Vol.  3:55*. 
Creer,  Morris,  Vol.  4:491. 
Crismon,  Charles,  jun.,  Vol.  2:611*. 
Crismon,  Elizabeth  T.  C,  Vol.  2:612*; 

Vol.  4:183. 
C-ritchfield,  Lewis  Robt.,  Vol.  4:440. 
Critchlow,  Benjamin  C,  Vol.  4:665. 
Critchlow,  Florence  Snow,  Vol.  4:280. 
Critchlow,  William,  Vol.  4:127*. 
Crittenden,  Irwin,  Vol.  4:26,  630. 
Crockett,  Alvin,  Vol.  1:418. 
C"rockett,  Hyrum  Enos,  Vol.  4:512. 
Crockett,  Ozro  0.,  Vol.  2:172*,  173. 
Crockett,  Wm.  Joseph,  Vol.  4:533. 
Croft,  Edward  Woolley,  Vol.  4:415. 
Crook,  Frederick,  Vol.  4:659. 
Crook,  John  W.,  Vol.  2:13. 
Crookston,  Nicholas  Welch,  Vol.  4:436. 
Crosby,  George  H.,  Vol.  2:44;  Vol.  3: 

355*. 
Crosby,  George  H.,  jun..  Vol.  3:357*. 
Crosby,  Jesse  W.,  jun..  Vol.  1:541*. 
Crosby,  Oscar,  Vol.  4:697. 
Crossgrove,  James  A.  B.,  Vol.  2:300*. 
Crouch,  Ebenezer,  Vol.  4:401. 
Crow,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  1:621*. 
Crowther,  Edward  N.,  Vol.  4:519. 
Crowther,  James  F.,  Vol.  1:553. 
Crowther,  Osmond,  Vol.  4:535. 
Crowther,  Thomas  A.,  Vol.  4:609. 
Crowther,  William  0.,  Vol.  3:358. 
Crump,  Bert  Manuel,  Vol.  4:667. 
Crump,  William  C,  Vol.  1:580*. 
Crump,  William  C,  jun.,  Vol.  1:569*. 
Cullimore,  Albert  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:643. 
Cummard,  John,   Vol.   3:359*. 
Cummings,  Benjamin  F.,  Vol.  3:620. 
Cummings,  Benj.  F.,  jun.,  Vol.  3:622*. 
Cummings,  Henry  Clay,  Vol.  4:660. 
C"ummings,    Horace    H.,    Vol.    1:713*; 

Vol.  4:208,  347. 
Cummings,  James  D.,  Vol.  1:568. 
Cunningham,  Andi'ew,  Vol.  2:370*. 
Cunningham,  Hyrum  R.,  Vol.  4:672. 
Curlew  Stake,  Vol.  4:446-450. 
Curtis,  Dorr  Purdy,  Vol.   4:740. 
Curtis,  Lyman,  Vol.  4:689,  697. 
Curtis,  Moses  Monroe,  Vol.  4:600. 


INDEX 


781 


Curtis,  Nahum  B.,  Vol.  4:638. 
Gushing,  Hosea,  Vol.  4:698. 
Cutler,  Allen  Riley,  Vol.  2:174*. 
Cutler,  Edwin,  Vol.  4:615. 
Cutler,  Ethan  F.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:576. 
Cutler,  Frank,  Vol.  4:376. 
Cutler,  Harmon  Scott,  Vol.  4:502. 
Cutler,    Heber    S.,   Vol.   2:439*. 
Cutler,  John  C,  Vol.  3:360*. 
Cutler,  John  C,  jun..  Vol.  2:100*. 
Cutler,  Jonathan  C,  Vol.  4:447. 
Cutler,  Joseph  J.,  Vol.  4:447. 
Cutler,  Mary  Alice  Felt,  Vol.  4:280*. 
Cutler,  Newel  J.,  Vol.  4:389. 
C-utler,  Parley  Leroy,  Vol.  4:672. 
Cutler,  Ralph,  Vol.  4:443,  741. 
Cutler,  Ross  B.,  Vol.  4:408. 
Cutler,  Royal  James,  sen..  Vol.  4:502. 
Cutler,  Royal  James,  jun..  Vol.  4:502. 
Cutler,  Thomas  R.,  Vol.  4:505. 
Czechoslovak  Mission,  Vol.  4:326-327. 

D 

Dabell,  Alfred  K.,  Vol.  4:585. 
Dahl,  Alexander,  Vol.   1:578*. 
Dahl,  David  Theodore,  Vol.  4:26*. 
Daines,  Lyman  L.  (Dr.),  Vol.  4:235*. 
Daines,  Robert,  Vol.  1:426*. 
Daines,  WilHam  Moroni,  Vol.  2:178. 
Dalby,  Oliver  C,  Vol.  4:470. 
Dalley,  John  Edward,  Vol.  3:362. 
Dalrymple,  Henry  H.,  Vol.  4:533. 
Dalton,  Don  Mack,  Vol.  4:378. 
Dalton,  Edward,  Vol.  4:609. 
Dalton,  Fred.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:423. 
Dalton,  George  M.,  Vol.  3:363. 
Dalton,  John  C,  Vol.  1:552*. 
Dalton,  John  Luther,  Vol.  4:322. 
Dalton,  Matthew  Wm.,  Vol.  4:344. 
Dame,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:532. 
Damron,  Joseph  W.,  Vol.  4:376. 
Damron,  Joseph  W.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:450. 
Dana,  Chas.  Roswell,  Vol.  4:554. 
Dana,  Clarence,  Vol.  4:524. 
Dana,  Hugh,  Vol.  4:524. 
Dana,  Isaac,  Vol.  4:524. 
Dana,  Roswell  Roy,  jun..  Vol.  4:627. 
Dance,  Philip  Bingham,  Vol.  4:419. 
Daniels,  James  E.,  Vol.  1:498. 
Daniels,  Wm.  Spafford,  Vol.  4:625. 
Danielsen,  Herman  Hans,  Vol.  4:412. 
Danielson,  Herman  Kerr,  Vol.  4:741. 
Danish  Mission,  Vol.  4:327-328. 
Danish-Norwegian  Mission,  Vol.  4:328- 

330. 
Dansie,  Alfred  J.,  Vol.  1:570. 
Dansie,  Robert,  Vol.  4:667. 
Darrington,  Edward,  Vol.  4:582. 
Darrington,  John  Chas.,  Vol.  4:432. 
Dastrup,  John,  Vol.  2:612*. 
Davenport,  James,  Vol.  4:698. 
Davey,  Charles  Edmund,  Vol.  4:575. 
Davidson,  Robert,  Vol.  3:56*. 
Davies,  Jos.  Thomas,  Vol.  4:515. 
Davis,  Albert  John,  Vol.  4:604. 


Davis 
Davis 
Davis 
Davis 
Davis 
Davis 
Davis 
Davis 
Davis 
Davis 
Davis 
Davis 


Albert  W.,  Vol.  2:410*. 
Alma  Morgan,  Vol.  4:524. 
Burdell,  Vol.  4:613. 
Daniel  C,  Vol.  4:741. 
David  L.,  Vol.  2:395*. 
Edna  May,  Vol.  4:183. 
Edward,  Vol.  2:759*;  Vol.  3:57*. 
Edward  Henry,  Vol.  4:447. 
Edward  W.,  Vol.  2:393*. 
Elizabeth  L.,  Vol.  2:613. 
Francis  Marion,  Vol.  4:615. 
George    (from   England),  Vol. 


1:399 

Davis,  George  (of  Wilford),  Vol.  4:672. 
Davis,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:238. 
Davis,  George  W.,  Vol.  1:436. 
Davis,    Helen,   Vol.   4:280. 
Davis,  Hyrum  Geo.,  Vol.  4:524. 
Davis,  James  W.,  Vol,  4:561. 
Davis,  Jamima  N.,  Vol.  2:394*. 
Davis,  John  Nightingale,  Vol.  4:652. 
Davis,  Nathan,  Vol.  1:647*. 
Davis,  Nofear,  Vol.  1:555*. 
Davis,  Parley,  Vol.  4:494. 
Davis,  Ray,  Vol.  4:568. 
Davis,  Sarah  E.  H.,  Vol.  2:393*. 
Davis,  Susan,  Vol.  4:742. 
Davis,  WilUam,  Vol.  4:426. 
Davis,  WilUam  C,  Vol.  2:197*. 
Davis,  William  K.,  Vol.  2:760. 
Davis,  Wm.  Ray,  Vol.  3:623. 
Davis,  Wm  Rees,  Vol.  2:613. 
Day,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:474. 
Day,  Henry  Earl,  Vol.  4:566. 
Day,  Ira  Nelson,  Vol.  4:460. 
Day,  James  Henry,  Vol.  4:566. 
Day,  Laronzo,  Vol.  2:461*. 
Day,  Rufus,  Vol.  4:528. 
Day,  Wilford,  Vol.  3:363*. 
Daybell,  Annie  Price,  Vol.  3:58*. 
Daybell,  William,  Vol.  3:58*. 
Dayley,  Enoch  Rhoades,  Vol.  4:440. 
Daynes,  Joseph  J.,  Vol.  1:746*;  Vol.  4: 

726. 
Daynes,  Joseph  J.,  jun.,  Vol.  2:477*. 
Dean,  Chas.  Edwin,  Vol.  4:676. 
Dean,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  4:366. 
Decker,  Alvin  Morris,  Vol.  4:676. 
Decker,  Isaac  Perry,  Vol.  4:698. 
Decker,  Zachariah  B.,  jun..  Vol.  4:618. 
Dee,  Annie  Taylor,  Vol.  3:60*. 
Dee,  Thomas  Duncombe,  Vol.  3:59*. 
Dee,  Genet  Bingham,  Vol.  4:281. 
De  Jong,  Gerrit,  jun..  Vol.  4:209*. 
De  La  Mare,  Philip,  Vol.  2:285*. 
DeLange,  Joseph  F.,  Vol.  3:364*. 
Deloney,  Hyrum  W.,  Vol.  4:638. 
Denham,  Virgil  Tillman,  Vol.  4:618. 
Denham,  Walter  Hampton,  Vol.  4:618. 
Denning,  James   H.,  Vol.  2:49*. 
Derricott,  Joseph  T.,  Vol.  2:23. 
Deseret  Stake,  Vol.  4:450-454. 
Deseret   Sunday   School,   see   General 

Board. 
Despain,  Alvin  Augustus,  Vol.  4:457. 


782 


INDEX 


Despain,  Chas.  Livingston,  Vol.  4:481. 
Despain,  David  A.,  Vol.  2:310*. 
Despain,  George  F.,  Vol.  2:312. 
Despain,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  2:614*. 
Despain,  Hyrum  S.,  Vol.  2:310*. 
Despain,  Lewis  Edgar,  Vol.  2:311*. 
Despain,  Ruth  A.  N.,  Vol.  2:308*. 
Despain,  Solomon  J.,  Vol.  2:307*. 
Despain,  Susan  Dean,  Vol.  2:309*. 
Despain,  William  J.,  Vol.  2:309*. 
De  St.  Jeor,  Francis,  Vol.  1:548. 
Dewey,  Benjamin  Franklin,  Vol.  4:698. 
Dewey,  Chas.  Jesse,  Vol.  4:405. 
Dewey,  George  Carlos,  Vol.  3:60*. 
Dewey,  James  Ernest,  Vol.  3:61*. 
Dewey,  John  Cyrus,  jun..  Vol.  4:628. 
Dewey,  Wm.  Alfred,  Vol.  4:579. 
Dewsnup,  Claude  Mace,  Vol.  4:606. 
Dibble,  Edwin  Cleveland,  Vol.  3:62*. 
Dick,  John,  Vol.  3:364. 
Dickson,  Albert  D.,  Vol.  3:62*. 
Dickson,  Bert  Stoddard,  Vol.  4:538. 
Didrickson,  Thordur,  Vol.  4:343. 
Dillman,  Ray  E.,  Vol.  4:589. 
Dimond,  Edwin  Robert,  Vol.  4:27*. 
Dimond,  Laura  B.,  Vol.  4:257. 
Dimond,  Robert  E.,  Vol.  1:592*. 
Dimond,  Thomas  W.,  Vol.  2:614. 
Dimond,  Walter  Abram,  Vol.  4:443. 
Dimond,  William  S.,  Vol.  1:590. 
Ditmer,  August  A.,  Vol.  2:435*. 
Dixon,  Asael  H.,  Vol.  4:649. 
Dixon,  Harvey,  Vol.  4:561. 
Dixon,  Henry  Aldus,  Vol.  4:657. 
Dixon,  John,  Vol.  4:698. 
Dixon,  Wm.  D.,  Vol.  4:544. 
Dodd,  Lewis  Abel,  Vol.  4:649. 
Dodge,  Augustus  Erastus,  Vol.  4:742. 
Donaldson,  John,  Vol.  4:470. 
Done,  Arthur  J.,  Vol.  2:124*. 
Done,  Willard,  Vol.  1:716*;  Vol.  4:235. 
Dorius,  Carl  C.  N.,  Vol.  2:760*. 
Dorius,  Charles  R.,  Vol.  2:615*. 
Dorius,  Claire  Parrish,  Vol.  4:257. 
Dorius,  John  Nikolai,  Vol.  4:623, 
Dotson,  Reuben  Wm.,  Vol.  4:408. 
Dougall,  Maria  Y.,  Vol.  2:617*;  Vol.  4: 

258* 
Dougail,  William  B,,  Vol.  2:615*. 
Dougall,  Wm.  B.,  jun..  Vol.  4:235. 
Douglass,  Richard,  Vol.  4:554. 
Dowdle,  Absalom  Porter,  Vol.  4:306. 
Doxey,  Graham  H.,  Vol.  4:508. 
Doxey,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:761*. 
Drake,  Horace,  Vol.  2:80*. 
Drake,  Lewis  Wells,  Vol.  4:432. 
Draney,  Lehi  H.,  Vol.  4:432. 
Draper,  Wm.,  Vol.  4:457. 
Dredge,  Wm.  Rhees,  Vol.  4:427. 
Driggs,  Apollos  G.,  Vol.  4:476. 
Driggs,  Don  Carlos,  Vol.  2:235*. 
Driggs,  Howard  R.,  Vol.  4:210*. 
Driggs,  Sterling  Graves,  Vol.  4:698. 
Druce,  John,  Vol.  2:496*. 
Druce,  John  Alma,  Vol.  2:499*. 


Druce,  Julia  A.  J.,  Vol.  2:498*. 
Drury,  Jesse  Moroni,  Vol.  4:575. 
Duce,  Geo.  A.,  Vol.  4:392. 
Duce,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:392. 
Duce,  Thos.  Wallace,  Vol.  4:392. 
Duchesne  Stake,  Vol.  4:454-457. 
Duckworth,  James,  Vol.  3:63*;  Vol.  4: 

310. 
Duff  in,  James  G.,  Vol.  1:537*;  Vol.  4: 

325*,  382. 
Dugmore,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:64*. 
Duke,  John,   Vol.   3:64*. 
Duke,  Robert,  Vol.  3:65*. 
Duke,  Robert  Stone,  Vol.  3:65. 
Duke,  Vern  V.,  Vol.  4:517. 
Dunbar,  William  C,  Vol.  4:335. 
Duncan,  Homer,  Vol.  1:622,  822*. 
Duncan,  John  Chas.,  Vol.  4:508. 
Dunford,  George,  Vol.  4:519. 
Dunford,  Grover  Cleveland,  Vol.  4:91*. 
Dunkley,  Joseph,  jun..  Vol.  4:466. 
Dunn,  Charles  O.,  Vol.  1:429*. 
Dunn,  Chas.  Welch,  Vol.  4:512. 
Dunn,  John  Madden,  Vol.  4:392. 
Dunn,  Samuel  A.,  Vol.  4:576. 
Dunn,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:559. 
Dunyon,  Phares  Wells,  Vol.  4:606. 
Durfee,  Jabez,  Vol.  4:551. 
Durfee,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:582. 
Durfey,  Francillo,  jun..  Vol.  4:405. 
Durham,  Alfred  M.,  Vol.  4:389. 
Durham,  George  Henry,  Vol.  4:212*. 
Durrant,  Clarence  Henry,  Vol.  4:657. 
Durrant,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:148. 
Durrant,  Lorenzo  H.,  Vol.  2:149. 
Durrant,  Stephen  T.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:554. 
Durrant,  Thos.  H.,  Vol.  2:180*. 
Durrant,  William  R.,  Vol.  3:365. 
Durtschi,  Alfred,  Vol.  4:638. 
Dusenberry,  Ida  Smoot,  Vol.  2:619*; 

Vol.  4:183. 
Dutson,  Richard  Daniel,  Vol.  4:585. 
Dutson,  Willis  Eddy,  Vol.  4:451. 
Dyches,  Thos.  W.,  jun..  Vol.  4:644. 
Dye,  Jonathan,  Vol.  4:541. 
Dye,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:66*. 
Dye,  Richard,  Vol.  2:286,  811*. 
Dye,  Sam.  Benj.,  Vol.  4:515. 
Dye,  Samuel  G.,  Vol.  2:288. 
Dye,  William  Maiden,  Vol.  3:67*. 
Dykes,  George  P.,  Vol.  2:762*;  Vol.  4: 

337*. 
Dykes,*  William,  Vol.  4:699. 

E 

Eagar,  John  Thomas,  Vol.  4:596. 
Eames,  David  Greaves,  Vol.  4:562. 
Eardley,  Bedson,  Vol.  2:276*. 
Eardley,  Catherine  A.  W.,  Vol.  4:258. 
Eardley,  James,  Vol.  2:277*. 
Eardley,  James  Walter,  Vol.  4:654. 
Eardley,  Louisa  C,  Vol.  2:277*. 
Eardley,  Roscoe  W.,  Vol.  4:235,  351*, 

508. 
Earl,  Clarence  Chas.,  Vol.  4:541. 


INDEX 


783 


Earl,  James  Calvin,  Vol.  3:365. 
Earl,  Joseph  Ira,  Vol.  2:192. 
Earl,  Milton  Wilson,  Vol.  4:616. 
Earl,  Sylvester  H.   (pioneer),  Vol.  3: 

67*;   Vol.  4:699. 
Earl,  Sylvester  H.  (of  Virgen),  Vol.  3: 

366. 
Earley,  Lehi  Nephi,  Vol.  3:69*. 
East  Central  States  Mission,  Vol.  4: 

330-334. 
East  Jordan  Stake,  Vol.  4:457-459. 
Eastern  States  Mission,  Vol.  4:330-331. 
Eastman,  Ozro  French,  Vol.  4:699. 
Eastmond,  Margaret  Hull,  Vol.  4:281. 
Easton,  Robert,  Vol.  4:408. 
Eaton,  John  Burton,  Vol.  4:652. 
Eccles,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:195. 
Eccles,  Stewart,  Vol.  3:798. 
Eccles,  William,  Vol.  2:620*. 
Eckersley,  Geo.  Teasdale,  Vol.  4:663. 
Eckersley,  Joseph,  Vol.  1:346*;  Vol.  3: 

366. 
Eddington,  Elijah,  Vol.  4:638. 
Eddington,  Sarah,  Vol.  4:184,  258. 
Eddington,  William,  Vol.  2:620*;  Vol. 

4:726. 
Edgley,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:69*. 
Edgley,  Leo  Herbert,  Vol.  4:577. 
Edgley,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:423. 
Edlefsen,  Edlef  B.,  Vol.  4:638. 
Edwards,  Caleb  Gibbons,  Vol.  4:623. 
Edwards,  Harrison  M.,  jun..  Vol.  4:460. 
Edwards,  Stanley  H.,  Vol.  4:437. 
Edwards,  William,  Vol.  3:623*. 
Egan,  Howard,  Vol.  4:699. 
Egan,  Richard  E.,  Vol.  1:816*. 
Egbert,  John  Alex.,  Vol.  4:667. 
Egbert,  Hyrum  S.,  Vol.  4:638. 
Egbert,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:70*. 
Egbert,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  4:700. 
Egbert,  Samuel  Parley,  Vol.  4:672. 
Eggertsen,  Simon  P.,  jun.,  Vol.  1:493*. 
Eirikson,  Einar,  Vol.  4:343. 
Ek,  Carl  A.,  Vol.   1:686*. 
Ekman,  Edward  C,  Vol.  4:646. 
Elder,  Henry  Benson,  Vol.  3:624*. 
Eldredge,  Alma,  Vol.   1:341*. 
Eldredge,  Benjamin  R.,  Vol.  1:792*. 
Eldredge,  Frederick  B.,  Vol.  3:71*. 
Eldredge,  Horace  S.,  Vol.  1:196*;  Vol. 

4:313*. 
Eldredge,  James  Alonson,  Vol.  3:71*. 
Eldredge,  Jane  Jennings,  Vol.  3:72. 
Eldredge,  John  Sunderlin,  Vol.  4:700. 
Eldredge,  Joseph  Harold,  Vol.  4:589. 
Elggren,  Albert  John,  Vol.  4:91*. 
Elieson,  Walter  Eli,  Vol.  4:508. 
Elison,  John  Alfred,  Vol.  4:582. 
Ellerbeck,  Thomas  W.,  Vol.  3:72*. 
Ellertson,  Ephraim,  Vol.  4:496. 
Ellertson,  John  Louis,  Vol.  4:497. 
Ellett,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  4:663. 
Elliot,  Robt.  Lester,  Vol.  4:613. 
Ellison,  Ephraim  Peter,  Vol.  3:73*. 
Ellison,  James  Edw.,  Vol.  4:548,  636. 


Ellsworth,  Edmund,  Vol.  4:700. 
Ellsworth,  German  E.,  Vol.  4:236. 
Ellsworth,  Leo,  Vol.  4:619. 
Ellsworth,  William,  Vol.  4:600. 
Ellwood,  Robert,  Vol.  1:576*. 
Emery,  George  R.,  Vol.  1:644*. 
Emery,  Wilford  W.,  Vol.  2:409*. 
Emery  Stake,  Vol.  4:459-563. 
Empey,  Emma  Adams,  Vol.  4:184. 
Empey,  Nelson  Adam,  Vol.  4:464,  726. 
Empey,  William,  Vol.  4:701. 
Engberg,  Andreas,  Vol.  1:514. 
England,  Azile  Lawrence,  Vol.  4:646. 
England,  Charles,  Vol.  4:512. 
England,  James,  Vol.  4:654. 
England,  Wm.  T.,  Vol.  4:419. 
Enniss,  Willard  Boulter,  Vol.  4:457. 
Ensign  Stake,  Vol.  4:463-465. 
Ensign,  Datus  H.,  Vol.  2:245*. 
Ensign,  Geo.  Calvin,  Vol.  4:548. 
Ensign,  Horace  Datus,  Vol.  4:701. 
Ensign,  Horace  S.,  Vol.  4:236. 
Ensign,  Marius,  Vol.  3:367*. 
Ensign,  Rufus  B.,  Vol.  2:490*. 
Enz,  Gottleib,  sen..  Vol.  2:207. 
Ercanbrack,  Otis  L.,  Vol.  4:644. 
Erekson,  James  Theo.,  jun..  Vol.  4:444. 
Erekson,  Wm.  Benbow,  Vol.  4:444. 
Ericksen,  Bendt  Jensen,  Vol.  4:129*. 
Ericksen,  Edna  Clark,  Vol.  4:281. 
Ericksen,  Ephraim  Edward,  Vol.  4:236. 
Ericksen,  Louis  E.,  Vol.  4:562. 
Erickson,  August,  Vol.  3:367*. 
Erickson,  Einar,  Vol.  1:525*. 
Erickson,  Geo.  Henry,  Vol.  4:129. 
Erickson,  Jacob  Emil,  Vol.  2:466*. 
Erickson,  John,  Vol.  1:588. 
Erickson,  Wm.  Seth,  Vol.  4:585. 
Erlandson,  Otto  Bernhard,  Vol.  4:544 
Ernst,  Carl  Edward,  Vol.  4:742. 
Ernstsen,  Ernest  Mark,  Vol.  3:625. 
Esplin,  Edgar  Cox,  Vol.  4:742. 
Esplin,  Henry  Webster,  Vol.  3:74*. 
Esplin,  Marion,  Vol.  4:616. 
Esplin,  William  Cox,  Vol.  3:625. 
Etherington,  Geo.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:554. 
European  Mission,  Vol.  4:334. 
Evans,  Abel,  Vol.  3:625. 
Evans,  Abel  John,  Vol.  3:626*. 
Evans,  Amy  Jane  Whipple,  Vol.  4:184. 
Evans,  Beatrice  Cannon,  Vol.  4:282. 
Evans,  Charles  David,  Vol.  4:568. 
Evans,  David,  Vol.  3:627. 
Evans,  David  Samuel,  Vol.  4:562. 
Evans,  Fred.  Chas.,  Vol.  4:533. 
Evans,  Henry,  Vol.  2:289*. 
Evans,  Irma  Bitner,  Vol.  4:282. 
Evans,  Israel,  Vol.  4:743. 
Evans,  John  A.,  Vol.  2:499*. 
Evans,  John  William,  Vol.  3:75*. 
Evans,  Jonah,  Vol.  4:520. 
Evans,  Lorenzo  Bowen,  Vol.  4:447. 
Evans,  Martha  J.,  Vol.  4:259. 
Evans,  Morgan  D.,  Vol.  4:437. 
Evans,  Priscilla  M.,  Vol.  2:360*. 


784 


INDEX 


Evans,  Reginald,  Vol.  3:368*. 
Evans,  Richard  L.,  Vol.  4:236*. 
Evans,  Taliesin  Thomas,  Vol.  3:369*. 
Evans,  Thos.  Benj.,  Vol.  4:559. 
Evans,  Thomas  D.,  Vol.  2:359*. 
Evans,  Thos.  Jones  Davis,  Vol.  4:520. 
Evans,  William,  Vol.  3:75*. 
Evensen,  Nils,  Vol.  4:677. 
Everett,  Addison,  Vol.  4:702. 
Everett,  Elijah,  Vol.  4:623. 
Everton,  Walter  Marion,  Vol.  4:436. 
Ewell,  Francis  M.,  Vol.  1:525*. 
Eyre,  Floyed  G.,  Vol.  4:237*. 
Eyre,  George  H.,  Vol.  3:369*;  Vol.  4: 

408. 
Eyring,  Henry,  Vol.  1:311*;  Vol.  4:345. 
Eyvindson,  Jon,  Vol.  4:343, 


Facer,  George,  Vol.  4:427. 
Facer,  Geo.  Henry,  Vol.  4:520. 
Facer,  James  Jarvis,  Vol.  4:488. 
Facer,  James  J.,  Vol.  4:577. 
Facer,  James  Vere,  Vol.  4:577. 
Facer,  Wm.  Orville,  Vol.  4:657. 
Facer,  Wm.  John,  Vol.  4:427. 
Fagg,  Chas.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:479. 
Fails,  Herman  Peter,  Vol.  4:530. 
Fairbanks,  David,  Vol.  4:508. 
Fairbanks,  Henry,  Vol.  2:354. 
Fairbanks,  John  B.,  Vol.  2:352*. 
Fairbanks,  Joseph  Roy,  Vol.  4:638. 
Fairbanks,  Joseph  W.,  Vol.  2:211. 
Fairbanks,  Nathaniel,  Vol.  2:355*;  Vol. 

4:702. 
Fairbanks,  Stanley  Brooks,  Vol.  4:638. 
Fairbourn,  Edward,  Vol.  4:28. 
Fairbourn,  Richard  M.,  Vol.  2:296*. 
Fairbourn,  William,  Vol.  2:295*. 
Fairbourne,  Jos.  Taylor,  Vol.  4:566. 

Farmer,  Erastus  G.,  Vol.  1:447*. 

Famham,  Augustus,  Vol.  4:307. 

Farnsworth,  Albert  S.,  Vol.  4:672. 

Farnsworth,  Burton  K.,  Vol.  4:237. 

Farnsworth,  Edward  W.,  Vol.  4:483. 

Farnsworth,  Franklin  D.,  Vol.  3:370. 

Farnsworth,  Julia  P.  M.,  Vol.  2:621*; 
Vol.  4:184. 

Farnsworth,  Lester  Burt,  Vol.  4:499. 

Farnsworth,  Moses  F.,  Vol.  1:522. 

Farnsworth,  Philo  T.,  Vol.  3:370*;  Vol. 
4:238. 

Farr,   Aaron   F.,  Vol.  4:702. 

Farr,  Enoch,  Vol.  4:339. 

Farr,  Lorin,  Vol.  1:749. 

Farr,  Lucian  C.,  jun..  Vol.  3:76. 

Farr,  Willard,  Vol.  1:555*. 

Farr,  Willard  Ballantyne,  Vol.  4:619. 

Farr,  Winslow,  Vol.  4:499. 

Farr,  Winslow,  jun..  Vol.  4:554. 

Farrell,  Alfred  Lundberg,  Vol.  4:352*. 

Farrell,  George  L.,  Vol.  1:765*. 

Farrell,  John,  Vol.  2:334*. 

Farrer,  Wesley  Wm.,  Vol.  4:409. 

Faucett,  William,  Vol.  2:622,  808*. 


Fawcett,  Geo.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:28. 
Fawcett,  Nephi  Robert,  Vol.  4:592. 
Fawcett,  Wm.,  Vol.  4:592. 
Fawns,  Arthur  Eugene,  Vol.  4:636. 
Fawns,  David  Fowler,  Vol.  3:76*. 
Felt,  Charles  Brigham,  Vol.  4:92*. 
Felt,  (Anna)  Marie  Fox,  Vol.  4:212. 
Felt,  David  P.,  Vol.  1:689*. 
Felt,  Louie  Bouton,  Vol.  4:282. 
Felt,  Nathaniel  H.,  Vol.  2:380*. 
Felt,  Vera  Ingar,  Vol.  4:283. 
Fenton,  Joseph  J.,  Vol.  2:436*. 
Fenton,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:437*. 
Ferguson,  Elmer  C,  Vol.  4:616. 
Ferguson,  James,  Vol.  4:743. 
Ferguson,  James  Baum,  Vol.  4:613. 
Fernelius,  Adolph  G.,  Vol.  4:541. 
Fernelius,  Charles  A.,  Vol.  2:254. 
Fernstrom,  Frans  S.,  Vol.  1:684*. 
Ferrin,  Arthur  M.,  Vol.  4:559. 
Ferrin,  Charles  Ether,  Vol.  3:372. 
Ferrin,  Josiah  Leaman,  Vol.  2:623*. 
Ferrin,  Josiah  Marsh,  Vol.  2:242*. 
Fetzer,  Casper  John,  Vol.  4:93*. 
Fetzer,  John,  Vol.  4:508, 
Fetzer,  John  Casper,  Vol.  4:726. 
Fielding,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:762*;  Vol.  4: 

314*. 
Fife,  Arthur  Root,  Vol.  4:572. 
Fife,  John  Jacob,  Vol.  3:628. 
Finch,  Geo.  Nephi,  Vol.  4:644, 
Finch,  Harry  L.,  Vol.  4:726. 
Findlay,  Alma,  Vol.  4:401. 
Finlayson,  Birdwell,  Vol.  4:577. 
Finlayson,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:623*. 
Finlinson,  Joseph  T.,  Vol.  3:77*. 
Fish,  John  Lazelle,  Vol.  4:619. 
Fish,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:215. 
Fish,  Silas  L.,  Vol.  4:619. 
Fishburn,  James  Alfred,  Vol.  4:427. 
Fisher,  Franklin  Pierce,  Vol.  3:77*. 
Fisher,  Frederic  Merle,  Vol.  4:470. 
Fisher,  Geo.  Howard,  Vol.  4:491. 
Fisher,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  3:371. 
Fisher,  William  F.,  Vol.  1:447*. 
Fitzgerald,  J.  W.  W.,  Vol.  1:793*. 
Fitzgerald,  Perry,  Vol.  3:628*;  Vol.  4: 

702. 
Fjeld,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:629*;  Vol.  4:310. 
Fjeldsted,  Andrew  C,  Vol.  1:817*. 
Fjeldsted,   Christian   D.,  Vol.    1:203*; 

Vol.  3:746;  Vol.  4:370*. 
Fjeldsted,  Sidney  James,  Vol.  4:481. 
Flake,  Green,  Vol.  4:703. 
Flake,  James  M.,  Vol.  2:218. 
Flake,  Osmer  Dennis,  Vol.  3:78*,  372. 
Flamm,  Henry,  Vol.  4:387. 
Flamm,  Henry  Joseph,  Vol.  3:372. 
Flanigan,  Alma  Emmett,  Vol.  4:678. 
Flanigan,  James  Henry,  Vol.  3:631. 
Fletcher,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:471. 
Flint,  William,  Vol.  4:94*. 
Florence,  Henry,  Vol.  3:79*. 
Florence,  Samuel  S.,  Vol.  3:79*. 
Fluckiger,  John,  Vol.  3:80. 


INDEX 


785 


Flygare,  Nils  C,  Vol.  1:461*;  Vol.  4: 

370*. 
Flynn,  Clifford  Clinton,  Vol.  4:649. 
Fogg,  James  Ezra,  Vol.  4:672. 
Foisy,  Ivan  Louis,  Vol.  4:625. 
Folkerson,  Hans  Peter,  Vol.  2:623*. 
Folland,  Grace  Freeze,  Vol.  4:283. 
Folsom,  Catherine,  Vol.  4:259. 
Folsom,  Maurine  Bennion,  Vol.  4:283. 
Foote,  David,  Vol.  1:374. 
Foote,  Warren,  Vol.  1:375*. 
Forbush,  Loren  Ezra,  Vol.  2:326*. 
Forbush,  Rufus,  Vol.  2:325. 
Ford,  Joseph  Nelson,  Vol.  3:80*. 
Ford,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:307. 
Ford,  William,  Vol.  3:373*. 
Forsberg,  Charles  E.,  Vol.  3:373. 
Forsgren,  Eli  Smith,  Vol.  4:562. 
Forsgren,  John  Clifford,  Vol.  4:562. 
Forsgren,  John  Erik,  Vol.  4:370*,  743. 
Forsgren,  Peter  A.,  Vol.  1:393*. 
Forsyth,  George  J.  B.  H.,  Vol.  3:374. 
Forsyth,  James  Arzy,  Vol.  3:631. 
Forsyth,  Jesse  Turner,  Vol.  3:374*. 
Forsyth,  Neil,  Vol.  4:663. 
Forsyth,  Thomas  R.,  Vol.  3:375. 
Foster,  James,  Vol.  1:191. 
Foster,  Solon  J.,  Vol.  3:81*. 
Foster,  Wm.  Geo.,  Vol.  4:568. 
Fotheringham,    WiUiam,   Vol.   2:190*; 

Vol.  4:378*. 
Foulger,  Albert  Burton,  Vol.  4:559. 
Foulger,  Herbert  Brown,  Vol.  4:376. 
Foutz,  Alma  Luff,  Vol.  4:677. 
Foutz,  Geo.  T.,  Vol.  4:433. 
Fowler,  John  Sherman,  Vol.  4:703. 
Fowler,  William,  Vol.  4:94. 
Fox,  Isaac  W.,  Vol.  1:505. 
Fox,  Jesse  W.,  Vol.  1:774*. 
Fox,  Ruth  May,  Vol.  4:259*. 
Fox,  Samuel  Bradford,  Vol.  4:703. 
Frame,  Archibald,  Vol.  2:474*. 
Francis,  Alonzo,  Vol.  3:83*. 
Francis,  Esther  C.  E.  W.,  Vol.  3:83*. 
Francis,  Howard,  Vol.  4:538. 
Francis,  Maria  Banks,  Vol.  4:95. 
Francis,  Sam.   (Alberta),  Vol.  3:376*. 
Francis,  Samuel  (Morgan),  Vol.  3:81*. 
Francom,  Jos.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:660. 
Frandsen,  George,  Vol.  4:437. 
Frandsen,  James  Ernest,  Vol.  4:551. 
Frandsen,  Peter  L.,  Vol.  4:481. 
Frank,  Christopher,  Vol.  2:20. 
Frankland,  John  Dye,  Vol.  3:631. 
Franklin  Stake,  Vol.  4:465-468. 
Fraughton,  Franklin  A.,  Vol.  3:84*. 
Fraughton,  Juliet  Mott,  Vol.  3:85*. 
Frazier,  Marion,  Vol.  1:469*;  Vol.  4: 

630. 
Freckleton,  Wilford  O.,  Vol.  3:631. 
Fredrickson,  John,  Vol.  3:376. 
Fredrickson,  Joseph  James,  Vol.  4:29. 
Free,  Sarah  J.  H.,  Vol.  2:394*. 
Freeman,  Elijah  N.,  Vol.  1:329*. 
Freeman,  John  Monroe,  Vol.  4:703. 

Vol.  IV,  No.  50 


Freeman,  John  Woodruff,  Vol.  4:592. 
Freer,  Joseph  Slack,  Vol.  4:672. 
Freestone,  George,  Vol.  4:652. 
Freeze,  Lillie  (Leila)  Tuckett,  Vol.  4: 

259,  283*. 
Freeze,  Mary  A.  Burnham,  VoL  4:260. 
Frehner,  Henry,  Vol.  4:531. 
Frehner,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:532. 
Frei,  Edward  Rudolph,  Vol.  4:592. 
Frei,  Vivian  Jacob,  Vol.  4:592. 
Fremont  Stake,  Vol.  4:468-473. 
French  Mission,  Vol.  4:334-337. 
Frick,  Horace  Monroe,  Vol.  4:703. 
Fridal,  Knud  Hansen,  Vol.  3:86*;  VoL 

4:130*. 
Fridal,  Knud  H.,  jun..  Vol.  3:377*. 
Fridal,  Mary  (Marie)  H.,  Vol.  4:131*. 
Frodsham,  James  R.,  Vol.  4:392. 
Frost,  Burr,  Vol.  4:703. 
Fry,  Richard,  Vol.   1:474,  821*. 
Fuchs,  Charles  F.,  Vol.  3:632. 
Fugal,  James  Peter,  Vol.  4:616. 
Fuhriman,   Geo.   Washington,  VoL   4: 

423. 
Fuhriman,  Godfrey,  Vol.  3:86*. 
Fuhriman,  Godfrey  Jared,  Vol.  4:520. 
Fuller,  Edmund  B.,  Vol.  2:334*. 
Fuller,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:335*. 
Fuller,  Henry  John,  Vol.  2:624*. 
Fuller,  Perry  Boyd,  Vol.  3:377. 
Fuller,  Thos.  Francis,  Vol.  4:600. 
Fuller,  Wyllys  Darwin,  Vol.  4:593. 
Fullmer,  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:132*. 
Fullmer,  David,  Vol.  1:289*. 
Fullmer,  Edwin  D.,  Vol.  4:437. 
Fullmer,  Franklin  Junius,  Vol.  4:376. 
Fullmer,  Halsey  Dean,  Vol.  4:638. 
Fullmer,  John  Wesley,  Vol.  4:451. 
Fullmer,  Oscar  Myron,  Vol.  4:451. 
Fullmer,  Wm.  Price,  jun..  Vol.  4:660. 
Funk,  Hans,  Vol.  4:412. 
Funk,  James  William,  Vol.  2:42;  VoL 

4:412. 
Funk,  Marcus,  Vol.  4:593. 
Funk,  Willard  R.,  jun.,  Vol.  3:632. 


Gaelte,  Andreas  O.,  Vol.  1:587*. 
Gaeth,  Arthur,  Vol.  4:326. 
Gagon,  Joseph  Albert,  VoL  4:644. 
Gailey,  John  William,  Vol.  3:87*. 
Gallop,  William,  Vol.  1:497. 
Gambling,  John,  Vol.  4:401. 
Gamett,  Clarence  A.,  Vol.  4:643. 
Gardiner,  Clarence  L.,  Vol.  4:477. 
Gardinei-,  Fredrick  Geo.,  Vol.  4:571. 
Gardner,  Ann  Knox,  Vol.  2:349*. 
Gardner,   Archibald,  Vol.   2:329*. 
Gardner,  Clarence,  Vol.  4:628. 
Gardner,  Edward  Eugene,  Vol.  4:451. 
Gardner,  Eliza  Rogers,  Vol.  2:349. 
Gardner,  Franklin  R.,  Vol.  4:628. 
Gardner,  Geo.  Albert,  Vol.  4:660. 
Gardner,  Henry,  Vol.  1:797. 

December  12,  1936 


(86 


INDEX 


Gardner,  Henry   A.,  Vol.   3:633*. 

Gardner,  James,  Vol.  2:348*. 

Gardner,  James  Hamilton,  Vol.  4:133. 

Gardner,  James  T.,  Vol.  3:378. 

Gardner,  John  Alfred,  Vol.  4:488. 

Gardner,  Joseph  Sam.,  Vol.  4:419. 

Gardner,  Niel  L.,  Vol.  2:333*. 

Gardner,  Robert,  jun.,  Vol.  2:625*. 

Gardner,  William,  Vol.  3:379*;  Vol.  4: 
307*,  360. 

Gardner,  Wm.  Clark,  Vol.  4:524. 

Gardner,  Wm.  H.,  Vol.  4:667. 

Garff,  Geo.  Peter,  Vol.  4:660. 

Garfield,  Raphael,  Vol.  3:380*. 

Garfield  Stake,  Vol.  4:473-476. 

Gam,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:508. 

Garn,  James  E.,  Vol.  3:88. 

Garn,  Micah  A.,  Vol.  4:405. 

Garner,  Henry  James,  Vol.  2:251*. 

Garner,  Horace  Eugene,  Vol.  4:665. 

Garrick,  Elizabeth  T.,  Vol.  2:558*. 

Garrick,  Hamilton  M.,  Vol.  2:557*. 

Gassman,  Otto,  Vol.  4:466. 

Gates,  B.  Cecil,  Vol.  4:238. 

Gates,  Emma  Lucy,  Vol.  3:380*. 

Gates,  Jacob,  Vol.  1:197,  Vol.  2:808*. 

Gates,  Jacob  F.,  Vol.  2:625*. 

Gates,  Lawrence,  Vol.  4:474. 

Gates,  Susa  Young,  Vol.  2:626*;  Vol.  4: 
185,  260. 

Gaylord,  John,  Vol.   1:193. 

Geary,  Chas.  Calvin,  Vol.  4:538. 

Geddes,  Hugh  S.,  Vol.  1:442*. 

Geddes,  James  Stewart,  Vol.  4:562. 

Geddes,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  1:439*. 

Geddes,  Wm.,  Vol.  1:462*;  Vol.  4:307*. 

Gee,  Asahel  Thomas,  Vol.  4:433. 

Gee,  Edgar  Lafayette,  Vol.  4:638. 

Gee,  Salmon,  Vol.  1:192. 

Geertsen,  Peter  C,  Vol.  2:629*. 

Genealogical  Society  of  Utah,  Vol.  4: 
680-687. 

General  Board  of  Deseret  Sunday 
School  Union,  Vol.  4:201-229. 

General  Board  of  Relief  Society,  Vol. 
4:177-201. 

General  Board  of  Young  Men's  Mutual 
Improvement  Association,  Vol.  4: 
229,    230*-252. 

General  Boai-d  of  Young  Woman's  Mu- 
tual Improvement  Association,  Vol. 
4:252-271. 

General  Board  of  the  Primary  Associa- 
tion, Vol.  4:271-305. 

George,  Joseph  Ezra,  Vol.  4:628. 

George,  Leslie,  Vol.  4:474. 

George,  Preal,  Vol.  4:528. 

Georgeson,  Niels,  Vol.  1:445*. 

Georgeson,  William,  Vol.  3:381*. 

German  Mission,  Vol.  4:337-338. 

German-Austrian  Mission,  Vol.  4:338. 

Gerrard,  George  E.,  Vol.  2:473*. 

Gerrard,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:475*. 

Gerstner,  John  Joseph,  Vol.  4:575. 

Gibb,  John  Lye,  Vol.  3:382*. 


Gibbons,  Andrew  S.,  Vol.  2:194*;  Vol. 

4:704. 
Gibbons,  Andrew  V.,  Vol.  1:554. 
Gibbons,  Edward  Richard,  Vol.  4:743. 
Gibbons,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:88*. 
Gibbons,  Joseph  Weston,  Vol.  4:401. 
Gibbons,  LeRoy,  Vol.  4:596. 
Gibbons,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:328*. 
Gibbons,   William   Oliver,   Vol.   2:763; 

Vol.  4:630. 
Gibbs,  Horace,  Vol.  2:763*. 
Gibbs,  James  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:520. 
Gibbs,  John  Henry,  Vol.  3:382. 
Gibbs,  John  Robert,  Vol.  4:520. 
Gibbs,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:771*. 
Gibby,  Richard  S.,  Vol.  4:657. 
Gibson,  James  Jardine,  Vol.  4:554. 
Gibson,  John,  Vol.  4:554. 
Gibson,  Robert  Orson,  Vol.  4:532. 
Gibson,  Walter  Murray,  Vol.  4:339. 
Gifford,  Freeborn  D.,  Vol.  1:539. 
Gifford,  Oliver  D.,  Vol.  1:538. 
Gifford,  Samuel  K.,  Vol.  2:194. 
Gilbert,  Alonzo  Jesse,  Vol.  4:133*. 
Gilbert,  James  Harris,  Vol.  4:491. 
Gilbert,  Thos.  Martindale,  Vol.  4:455. 
Giles,  Franklin  Moor,  Vol.  '^:>  ..  , 
Giles,  Frederick  W.,  Vol.  2:630. 
Giles,  George  Elmo,  Vol.  3:633. 
Giles,  George  Thomas,  Vol.  3:89*. 
Giles,  Henry  Evans,  Vol.  2:507*. 
Giles,  James  Arthur,  Vol.  4:134*. 
Giles,  John  D.,  Vol.  4:238*. 
Giles,  John  Thos.,  Vol.  4:657. 
Giles,  Taylor,  Vol.  3:634. 
Giles,  Thomas  D.,  Vol.  2:507*. 
Giles,  Thos.  Huskinson,  Vol.  4:660. 
Giles,  William,  Vol.  4:538. 
Gill,  Joseph  S.  B.,  Vol.  3:634. 
Gillen,  Erick,  Vol.  2:458*. 
Gillet,  Collins  Moore,  Vol.  3:634. 
Gillett,  John  Joshua,  Vol.  4:646. 
Gillispie,  Alexander,  Vol.  2:5*. 
Glad,  Alfred  P.  A.,  Vol.  4:604. 
Glade,  Earl  J.,  Vol.  4:213*. 
Glade,  James  Richard,  Vol.  2:630*. 
Glazier,  John  W.,  Vol.  1:541. 
Gleason,  John  S.,  Vol.  3:91*;  Vol.  4: 

704. 
Gledhill,  Fred  Ovie,  Vol.  4:528. 
Gledhill,  John  E.,  Vol.  4:551. 
Gledhill,  John  Ivo,  Vol.  2:632*. 
Gledhill,  Lilly  B.  I.,  Vol.  2:631*. 
Gledhill,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:631*. 
Glen,  Alexander,  Vol.  2:418*. 
Glines,  Eric,  Vol.  4:704. 
Glines,  James  H.,  Vol.  1:478*. 
Glover,  Albert,  Vol.  2:108*. 
Glover,  Betsy  C.  W.,  Vol.  2:531*. 
Glover,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:332*. 
Goaslind,  Charles  D.,  Vol.  2:171*. 
Goates,  Herman  Calvin,  Vol.  4:96*. 
Goddard,  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:239,  744*. 
Goddard,  Emma  J.  Nield,  Vol.  4f260. 
Goddard,  Geo.,  Vol.  1:706*;  Vol.  4:726. 


INDEX 


787 


Goddard,  Heber  S.,  Vol.  4:726. 
Goddard,  Joshua  Percy,  Vol.  4:508. 
Goddard,  Stephen  H.,  Vol.  4:704. 
Godfrey,  Caroline  T.,  Vol.  2:468*. 
Godfrey,  Fannie  A.,  Vol.  2:469*. 
Godfrey,  Horace  Truman,  Vol.  4:30. 
Godfrey,  James,   Vol.   2:468*. 
Godfrey,  James  Clifton,  Vol.  4:494. 
Goff,   Clifford   Isaac,  Vol.  4:135*. 
Goff,  Hyrum,  Vol.  1:308*. 
Goff,  Jedediah,  Vol.  3:92*. 
Gold,  Abraham  John,  Vol.  3:635*. 
Goodliffe,  Arnold,  Vol.  1:391*. 
Goodman,  John  Wm.,  Vol.  4:645. 
Goodrich,  Albert  G.,  Vol.  2:241,  812*. 
Goodrich,  Byron,  Vol.  4:652. 
Goodrich,  Leslie  Bruce,  Vol.  4:455. 
Goodwin,  Isaac,  Vol.  3:636*. 
Goodwin,  Samuel  Isaac,  Vol.  3:636*. 
Goold,  Robert  F.,  Vol.  2:632*. 
Goold,  Samuel  W.,  Vol.  2:212*. 
Gordon,  Robert  J.,  Vol.  2:234*. 
Gottfredsen,  Jacob,  Vol.  4:551. 
Gough,  Wm.  J.,  Vol.  4:484. 
Gould,  John,  Vol.  1:191. 
Gould,  Robert,  Vol.  2:336. 
Gould,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:383. 
Gould,  William,  Vol.  2:337*. 
Goulding,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:571. 

Gowans,  Hugh  S.,  Vol.  1:354*. 

Grace,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  3:92. 

Grace,  Isaac  Henry,  Vol.  3:384*;  Vol. 
4:497. 

Graham,  Archie  J.,  Vol.  4:416. 

Graham,  George,  Vol.  2:434*. 

Grange,  Franklin  Chas.,  Vol.  4:460. 

Granger,  Walter,  Vol.  3:384*. 

Granger,  Walter  Kiel,  Vol.  4:573. 

Granite  Stake,  Vol.  4:476-478. 

Grant,  Augusta  Winters,  Vol.  4:260. 

Grant,  Benjamin  F.,  Vol.  4:239,  726. 

Grant,  David,  Vol.  4:705. 

Grant,  Franklin  Davis,  Vol.  4:636. 

Grant,  George  R.,  Vol.  4:705. 

Grant,  Heber  J.,  Vol.  1:147*;   Vol.  3: 
746*;  Vol.  4:239,  314*,  346,  682*. 

Grant,  James,  Vol.  4:663. 

Grant,  Jedediah  M.,  Vol.  1:56*. 

Grant,  Joseph  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:621. 

Grant,  Joseph  Hyrum,  jun..  Vol.  4:508. 

Grant,  Lewis  McKeachie,  Vol.  2:89*. 

Grant,  Rachel  R.,  Ivins,  Vol.  3:637*. 

Grant,   Susan,   Vol.   4:185. 

Grant,  Wm.  Albert,  Vol.  4:566. 

Grant  Stake,  Vol.  4:478-480. 

Gray,  John  Cruickshank,  Vol.  3:3^5*. 

Green,  Benjamin,  Vol.  2:300.       ^ 

Green,  Cornelius  S.,  Vol.  4:631. 

Green,  Edward  Saxe,  Vol.  4:665. 

Green,  Erban,  Vol.  3:90*. 

Green,  George,  Vol.  4:665. 

Green,  Geo.  Davis,  Vol.  4:530. 

Green,"George  William,  Vol.  3:90*. 

Green,  John  Hyrum,  Vol,  3:91*. 


Green,  John  Wm.,  Vol.  4:647. 
Green,  Niels  F.  H.  N.,  Vol.  2:262. 
Green,  Oscar  Wm.  Greeley,  Vol.  4:586. 
Green,  Peter  Bertelsen,  Vol.  4:586. 
Green,  Reece  D.,  Vol.  4:600. 
Green,  William,  Vol.  2:301*. 
Greene,   John    Portineus,    Vol.    2:633; 

Vol.  4:331. 
Greene,  John  Young,  Vol.  4:705. 
Greene,  Jos.  P.,  Vol.  4:397. 
Greenhalgh,  Albert  A.,  Vol.  4:544. 
Greenhalgh,  Joseph  W.,  Vol.  3:638. 
Greenwood,  Barnard  H.,  Vol.  4:625. 
Greenwood,  Carlos  B.,  Vol.  4:625. 
Greenwood,  Earl  Samuel,  Vol.  3:799. 
Greenwood,  Hartley,  Vol.  2:636*. 
Greenwood,  Hazel  Hill,  Vol.  4:185. 
Greenwood,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:638. 
Greenwood,  Thomas  Abram,  Vol.  4:395. 
Greenwood,  Thomas  Foster,  Vol.  4:457. 
Greenwood,  Wm.  Snow,  Vol.  4:395. 
Greer,  Gilbert  Dunlap,  Vol.  4:596. 
Gregory,  Elijah  Binam,  Vol.  4:137. 
Gregson,  Thomas  S.,  Vol.  4:392. 
Griff eth,  Geo.  A.,  Vol.  4:562. 
Griffin,  Ernest  Adelbert,  Vol.  3:96*. 
Griffin,  Lorenzo  Heber,  Vol.  4:474. 
Griffin,  Wm.  Henry,  jun..  Vol.  4:436. 
Griffin,  William  Hyrum,  Vol.  1:404*; 
Vol.  4:412. 

Griffiths,  Thos.  Lewis,  Vol.  4:409. 

Grigg,  Parley  M.,  jun..  Vol.  4:423. 

Griggs,  James  F.,  Vol.  2:236*. 

Griggs,  Thomas  C,  Vol.  1:711*. 

Grimmett,  John  Henry,  Vol.  2:31*. 

Grimshaw,  Duckworth,  Vol.  2:37*. 

Groesbeck,  Hyrum  Smith,  Vol.  4:726. 

Groo,  Isaac,  Vol.  3:93*;  Vol.  4:307. 

Grotegut,  Simon  Wm.,  Vol.  4:568. 

Grouard,  Benjamin  F.,  Vol.  3:639;  Vol. 
4:376. 

Grover,  Geo.  Fredrick,  Vol.  4:649. 

Grover,  Joel,  Vol.  1:515. 

Grover,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:137*,  705. 

Grover,  Thomas,  jun.,  Vol.  4:142*. 

Grover,  Walter  L.,  Vol.  5:405. 

Grow,  Henry,  Vol.  3:94*. 

Grow,  Horace  I.,  Vol.  4:586. 

Grow,  John  Moyer,  Vol.  4:559. 

Grunder,  Albert,  Vol.  4:744. 

Gubler,  Ovando,  Vol.  4:678. 

Gudmundsen,  Isaac,  Vol.  2:50*. 

Gudmundson,  Gudmund,  Vol.  3:639. 

Guldbransen,  Ole,  jun..  Vol.  2:379*. 

Gummersall,  Geo.  H.,  Vol.  4:491. 

Gundersen,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:478*. 

Gundersen,  Thomas,  jun..  Vol.  2:479. 

Gunn,  Frederick  Thomas,  Vol.  3:386*. 

Gunn,  Thos.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:409. 

Gunnell,  Chas.  Brown,  Vol.  4:405. 

Gunnell,  Charles  Edward,  Vol.  3:97*. 

Gunnell,    Lewis    Jeff,   Vol.    4:583. 

Gunnison  Stake,  Vol.  4:480-483. 

Guymon,  Orson  Henry,  Vol.  4:438. 

Gwilliam,  Franklin  S.,  Vol.  4:424. 


788 


INDEX 


Gwilliam,  Henry  Beynon,  Vol.  4:548. 
Gwilliam,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  4:559. 


H 


Haacke,  Rulon  C,  Vol.  3:641. 
Haag,  Adolph,  Vol.  3:642. 
Hacking,  James,  Vol.  2:636*. 
Hacking,  James  Clair,  Vol.  4:652. 
Hacking,  Orson  Ezra,  Vol.  4:505. 
Hadfield,  John,  jun..  Vol.  4:554. 
Hadfield,  William,  Vol.  4:143. 
Hadlock,  Orlando  Bowen,  Vol.  4:548. 
Hadlock,  Orlando  Durham,  Vol.  4:665. 
Hafen,  Johan  Georg,  jun..  Vol.  4:593. 
Haigh,  William  H.,  Vol.  2:471*. 
Haight,  Catherine  W.,  Vol.  3:388*. 
Haight,   Hector   Caleb    (Farmington), 

Vol.  3:387*;  Vol.  4:371. 
Haight,  Hector  Caleb  (Oakley),  Vol.  4: 

440. 
Haight,  Horton  D.,  Vol.  1:302*. 
Haight,  Joseph  Young,  Vol.  4:376. 
Haight,  Julia  Van  O.,  Vol.  3:387*. 
Haight,  Louisa  L.,  Vol.  1:303*. 
Hair,  Thomas  C,  Vol.  3:388*;  Vol.  4: 

352*. 
Hakes,' Collins  R.,  Vol.  1:559*. 
Hakes,  Mabel  A.  M.,  Vol.  1:811*. 
Hale,  Alma  H.,  Vol.  1:402. 

Hale,  Aroet  Lucius,  Vol.  3:642. 

Hale,  Ernest  F.,  Vol.  4:397. 

Hale,  Heber  Quincy,   Vol.   3:97*. 

Hale,  Howard  Hoskins,  Vol.  4:464. 

Hale,  Solomon  E.  jun..  Vol.  3:643. 

Hale,  Solomon  H.,  Vol.  2:168*. 

Hale,  Wallace  Aroet,  Vol.  4:440. 

Hales,  George,  Vol.  4:645. 

Hales,  Geo.  Ray,  Vol.  4:568. 

Hales,  Jacob  Lehman,  Vol.  4:144. 

Hall,  Archibald  Sanford,  Vol.  4:447. 

Hall,  Ashley  Moroni,  Vol.  4:596. 

Hall,  Calvin,  Vol.  3:388*. 

Hall,  Charles  Scott,  Vol.  3:643. 

Hall,  Edward  S.,  Vol.  4:376. 

Hall,  Elizabeth  T.,  Vol.  2:637*. 

Hall,  Horace  Osborne,  Vol.  4:433. 

Hall,  Hubert  Frank,  Vol.  4:586. 

Hall,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:241. 

Hall,  Lester  LeRoy,  Vol.  3:644. 

Hall,  Mary  Bates,  Vol.  2:637,  810*. 

Hall,  Omer  Emmett,  Vol.  4:566. 

Hall,  Timothy,  Vol.  2:637*. 

Halliday,  George,  Vol.  3:389*. 

Halliday,  Rosetta  Eve,  Vol.  3:393*. 

Halliday,  Vernee  L.,  Vol.  3:392*. 

Halliday,  Willard   Henry,   Vol.   3:644. 

Halls,  George,  Vol.  3:98*. 

Halls,  John,  Vol.  4:559. 

Halls,  Mary  Moiselle,  Vol.  3:99. 

Halls,  William,  Vol.  2:204. 

Halverson,  Andrew  Reed,  Vol.  4:360. 

Halverson,  Arthur,  Vol.  4:559. 

Halverson,  Chas.  A.,  Vol.  4:541. 

Halverson,  Francis  Theo.,  Vol.  4:419. 


Hamblin,   Duane,  Vol.  4:596. 
Hamblin,  Frederick,  Vol.  4:596. 
Hamblin,  Jacob,  Vol.  3:100*. 
Hamblin,  Jacob,  jun..  Vol.  4:596. 
Hamilton,  Alex.  Parley,  Vol.  4:639. 
Hamilton,  Chas.  Orson,  Vol.  4:470, 
Hamilton,  James  C,  Vol.  1:791*. 
Hamilton,  Reuben  S.,  Vol.  2:315*. 
Hammer,  Jasper  John,  Vol.  4:616. 
Hammer,  Josiah  Austin,  Vol.  4:393. 
Hammon,  Amasa  Marion,  Vol.  4:666. 
Hammon,  Frank  Leslie,  Vol.  4:530. 
Hammond,  A.  Murray,  Vol.  4:512. 
Hammond,  Clyde  Asbury,  Vol.  4:607. 
Hammond,  Datus  E.,  Vol.  4:239*,  575. 
Hammond,  Francis  A.,  Vol.  1:351. 
Hammond,  Francis  P.,  Vol.  2:1. 
Hammond,  James  T.,  Vol.  1:723*. 

Hammond,  John  H.,  Vol.  3:393. 
Hammond,  Milton  D.,  Vol.  1:428*. 

Hammond,  Walter  D.,  Vol.  4:607. 

Hamson,  Hyrum  R.,  Vol.  3:644. 

Hanchett,  Ray  Monroe,  Vol.  4:600. 

Hancock,  Amy,  Vol.  2:351*. 

Hancock,  Charles  B.,  Vol.  4:744. 

Hancock,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:350*. 

Hancock,  Jeremiah  A.,  Vol.  4:575. 

Hancock,  Jesse  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:600. 

Hancock,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:705. 

Hancock,  Levi  W.,  Vol.  1:188*. 

Hanks,  Alfred  Lyman,  Vol.  4:647. 

Hanks,  Ephraim  K.,  Vol.  2:764*. 

Hanks,  Walter  E.,  Vol.  2:263*. 

Hanks,  Wm.  David,  Vol.  4:655. 

Hanks,  Sidney  Alvarus,  Vol.  4:706. 

Hansen,  Abraham  J.,  Vol.  4:568. 

Hansen,  Alfred,  Vol.  3:101*. 

Hansen,  Andrew  Janus,  Vol.  4:571. 

Hansen,  Anthon  Marius,  Vol.  4:427. 

Hansen,  Carl  K.,  Vol.  2:575*. 

Hansen,  Carl  Oscar,  Vol.  4:397. 

Hansen,  Chas.  Severin,  Vol.  4:481. 

Hansen,  Eugene  Severin,  Vol.  4:405. 

Hansen,  Christian  V.,  Vol.  3:394*. 

Hansen,   Delbert,  Vol.  4:551. 

Hansen,   Erastus,  Vol.  4:568. 

Hansen,  Hans,  Vol.  4:619. 

Hansen,    Hans    C,    (from    Denmark), 
Vol.  2:766,  Vol.  4:706. 

Hansen,  Hans  C.  (Mink  Creek),  Vol.  1: 
443. 

Hansen,  Hans  James,  Vol.  3:645. 

Hansen,  Hans  M.,  Vol.  1:343*. 

Hansen,  Hans  Peter,  Vol.  2:573. 

Hansen,   Isaac,  Vol.  4:544. 

Hansen,  Jens  (Brigham  City),  Vol.  4: 
427. 

Hansen,  Jens  (Spanish  Fork),  Vol.  2; 

361*. 
Hansen,  Jens  N.,  Vol.  1:406*. 
Hansen,  John,  Vol.  1:585. 
Hansen,  John  S.,  Vol.  4:327*. 
Hansen,  Joseph  C,  Vol.  2:217. 
Hansen,  Joseph  N.,  Vol.  4:623. 
Hansen,   Karen   R.,  Vol.  2:576*. 


INDEX 


789 


Hansen,  Lester  Laron,  Vol.  3:395*. 
Hansen,  Lorenzo  E.,  Vol.  4:466*. 
Hansen,  Michael,  Vol.  4:663. 
Hansen,  Niels,  Vol.  2:18*. 
Hansen,  Niels  H.,  Vol.  4:639. 
Hansen,  Oliver  A.,  Vol.  3:645*. 
Hansen,  Peter  Marker,  Vol.  3:102*. 
Hansen,  Peter  O.,  Vol.  2:766*. 
Hansen,  Peter  O.,  jun..  Vol.  3:103*. 
Hansen,  Victor  Lavan,  Vol.  3:104*. 
Hansen,  Wilford,  Vol.  4:625. 
Hansen,  Willard,  Vol.  4:515. 
Hansink,  Johannes   (Jan),  Vol.  4:352. 
Hanson,  Alma,   (Bates  Ward,  Idaho), 

Vol.3 :396. 
Hanson,    Alma    (Teton    Stake    Pres.), 

Vol.  4:639. 
Hanson,  Hyrum  James,  Vol.  4:520. 
Hanson,  Paul  Soren,  Vol.  4:589. 
Hanson,  Soren  J.,  Vol.  4:672. 
Harbertson,  James  M.,  Vol.  4:542. 
Hardcastle,  Levi,  Vol.  2:323. 
Harder,  Willet  Shave,  Vol.  2:767*. 
Harding,  Alfred  Wm.,  Vol.  4:657. 
Harding,  Charles  Don,  Vol.  2:387*. 
Hardman,  Frances  A.  C,  Vol.  2:767. 
Hardman,  Lehi  Nephi,  Vol.  2:767*. 
Hardy,  Aaron,  Vol.  2:166*. 
Hardy,  Adelaide  U.  Eldredge,  Vol.  4: 

284. 
Hardy,  Annie  Kay,  Vol.  4:186,  284. 
Hardy,   Charles   W.,   Vol.   2:101. 
Hardy,  George  W.,  Vol.  1:562. 
Hardy,  Leonard  G.,  Vol.  1:599*. 
Hardy,  Leonard  W.,  Vol.  1:236*. 
Hardy,  Milton  H.,  Vol.  4:240. 
Hardy,  Polly  A.  Reynolds,  Vol.  4:261. 
Hardy,  Rufus  Kay,  Vol.  4:97*,  360*. 
Hardy,  Wm.  Gilbert,  Vol.  4:440. 
Harker,  Ernest,  Vol.  4:616. 
Harker,  Harriet  Bennion,  Vol.  4:186. 
Harker,  Heber  Lawrence,  Vol.  4:393. 
Harker,  Levi,  Vol.  3:104*. 
Harkness,  Wm.  Thomas,  Vol.  4:566. 
Hai'line,  Oscar  Joseph,  Vol.  4:30*. 
Harmon,  Appleton  Milo,  Vol.  4:706. 
Harmon,  Melvin  M.,  Vol.  1:535. 
Harper,  Charles  Alfred,  Vol.  4:707. 
Harper,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:583. 
Harper,  Reese  Morris,  Vol.  4:440. 
Harper,  Seth  F.,  Vol.  4:441. 
Harper,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:427. 
Harper,  William  T.,  Vol.  1:549. 
Harriman,  Henry,  Vol.  1:193. 
Harrington,  Leonard  E.,  Vol.  3:799.  ■^ 
Harris,  Archibald,  Vol.  4:520. 
Harris,  Bernice  Rawlins,  Vol.  4:470. 
Harris,  Charles  Zera,  Vol.  3:105*. 
Harris,  Clarence  Earl,  Vol.  4:639. 
Harris,  Daniel  Bvowett,  Vol.  4:548. 
Harris,   David   Oscar,  Vol.  4:433, 
Harris,  Dennison  Lot,  Vol.  4:625. 
Harris,  Enoch,  Vol.  4:520. 
Harris,  Franklin  S.,  Vol.  4:240*. 
Harris,  Geo.  Henry,  Vol.  4:470. 


Harris,  Geo.  Summer,  Vol.  4:423. 

Harris,  Guy,  Vol.  4:397. 

Harris,  Hyrum  Smith,  Vol.  2:129;  Vol. 

4:347. 
Harris,  John  E.,  Vol.  4:517. 
Harris,  John  R.,  Vol.  2:2*. 
Harris,  Joseph  Bond,  Vol.  4:607. 
Harris,  Joseph  Emer,  Vol.  4:424. 
Harris,  Joseph  Robert,  Vol.  4:520. 
Harris,  Leander  S.,  Vol.  2:251. 
Hai-ris,  Lawi'ence  E.,  Vol.  4:433. 
Harris,  Leo.  Lott,  Vol.  4:393. 
Harris,  Louis  Wm.,  Vol.  4:409. 
Harris,  Louisa  Sargent,  Vol.  3:107. 
Harris,  Martin,  Vol.  1:271*. 
Harris,  Martin  H.,  Vol.  3:105*. 
Harris,   McGee,   Vol.   4:668. 
Harris,  Micah  F.,  Vol.  2:638. 
Harris,  Moses  Davis,  Vol.  4:502. 
Harris,  Ransom  Enoch,  Vol.  4:586. 
Harris,   Robert,   Vol.   4:744. 
Harris,  Silas,  Vol.  2:130*. 
Harris,  Thomas  Dodd,  Vol.  3:396. 
Harris,  Thos.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:506. 
Harris,  William  McGhee,  Vol.  3:107*; 

Vol.  4:398. 
Harrison,  Bartholomew,  Vol.  3:397. 
Harrison,  Edwin  D.,  Vol.  1:768*. 
Harrison,  Harold  Roy,  Vol.  4:669. 
Harrison,  Heber  E.,  Vol.  4:593. 
Hari-ison,  Isaac,  Vol.  4:457. 
Harrison,    James    Parry,    Vol.    2:133; 

Vol.  3:108*. 
Hart,  Alfred  Augustus,  Vol.  3:397*. 
Hart,  Arthur  W.,  Vol.  2:172*. 
Hart,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  3:748*;  Vol.  4: 

240,  325. 
Hart,  Geo.  Leland,  Vol.  4:586. 
Hart,  James  Henry,  Vol.  2:27*. 
Hart,  Lalene  Hendricks,  Vol.  4:186. 
Hart,  John  William,  Vol.  3:398. 
Hart,  Samuel  Walter,  Vol.  3:398. 
Harter,  John  Albert,  Vol.  4:605. 
Hartvigsen,  Jacob  L.,  Vol.  3:108. 
Harvey,  Ann  Coope,  Vol.  3:400. 
Harvey,  Hugh  William,  Vol.  3:399*. 
Harvey,  John,  Vol.  3:399. 
Harvey,  Richard  Coope,  Vol.  3:400*. 
Haskell,  Geo.  N.,  Vol.  4:745. 
Hatch,  Abram,  Vol.  1:359. 
Hatch,  Asa  Foulds,  Vol.  4:491. 
Hatch,  Ezra  Rosco,  Vol.  4:619. 
Hatch,  Ezra  Taft,  Vol.  4:14. 
Hatch,  Fred  Stevens,  Vol.  4:515. 
Hatch,  George  Andrew,  Vol.  3:400*. 
Hatch,  Henry  Ray,  Vol.  4:660. 
Hatch,  John  Leonard,  Vol.  4:491. 
Hatch,  Lafayette  Thatcher,  Vol.  4:745. 
Hatch,  Lorenzo  H.,  Vol.  1:323*. 
Hatch,  Lorenzo  L.,  Vol.  2:179*. 
Hatch,  Lucy  Alice,  Vol.  3:401. 
Hatch,  Meltair,  Vol.  2:182*. 
Hatch,  Orin,  Vol.  4:745. 
Hatch,  Robert  Oral,  Vol.  4:412. 
Hatch,  Steai-ns,  Vol.  3:109*. 


790 


INDEX 


Hatch,  Thomas  Asa,  Vol.  3:401. 
Hatch,  Walter,  Vol.  4:562. 
Hatch,  Wilder  True,  Vol.  2:45. 
Hatch,  Wm.  Ira,  Vol.  4:528. 
Haven,  Jesse,  Vol.  4:378. 
Hawaiian  Mission,  Vol.  4:338-342. 
Hawkes,  Nathan,  Vol.  3:109*. 
Hawkes,  Wm.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:562. 
Hawkins,  Riego,  Vol.  2:638*. 
Hawkins,  Riego  Stay,  Vol.  2:312;  Vol. 

4:457. 
Haws,  Caleb  W.,  Vol.  3:646. 
Haws,  Jesse,  Vol.  3:402. 
Haws,  Geo.  Martin,  Vol.  4:499. 
Haws,  John  M.,  Vol.  4:497. 
Hayes,  Alma,  Vol.  2:32*. 
Hayes,  Henry  Nephi,  Vol.  2:209*. 
Haymore,  Arthur  Sam.,  Vol.  4:524. 
Hazen,  Samuel  B.,  Vol.  4:605. 
Healy,  Leonard  Carson,  Vol.  4:566. 
Heaps,  William  Henry,  Vol.  3:402*. 
Heath,  Albert,  Vol.  4:470. 
Heaton,  Charles  Carroll,  Vol.  4:145. 
Heaton,  Israel  H.,  Vol.  3:110*. 
Heaton,  Jonathan  B.,  Vol.  3:403*. 
Hedlock,  Reuben,  Vol.  4:314. 
Hegstrom,  Wm.  C,  Vol.  4:398. 
Heiner,  Anthony,  Vol.  3:110*. 
Heiner,  Daniel,  Vol.  1:475. 
Heiner,  George,  Vol.  3:111*. 
Heiner,  Geo.  S.,  Vol.  4:538. 
Heiner,  Horace,  Vol.  4:538. 
Helm,  Levi  P.,  Vol.  4:610. 
Hemenway,  Lachoneus,  Vol.  2:457*. 
Hemmert,  Hans  Jorgen,  Vol.  2:231*. 
Hemsley,  Richard,  jun.,  Vol.  4:470. 
Henderson,   Elizabeth   S.   W.,  Vol.   3: 

113*. 
Henderson,  Henry  Williams,  Vol.  4:580. 
Henderson,  James  N.,  Vol.  3:403*. 
Henderson,  Sarah  A.  F.,  Vol.  3:113*. 
Henderson,  Wm.  Jasper,  Vol.   3:404*. 
Henderson,  Wm.  J.,  jun..  Vol.  3:112*. 
Henderson,  Wm.  W.,  Vol.  4:577,  580. 
Hendricks,   Brigham  A.,   Vol.   2:639*; 

Vol.  4:379. 
Hendricks,  James,  Vol.   2:403. 
Hendricks,  Milo  A.,  Vol.  4:577. 
Hendricks,  Ralph   H.,  Vol.   3:646. 
Hendricks,  Samuel  W.,  Vol.  3:405. 
Hendricks,  Wm.  Dorris,  Vol.  4:563. 
Hendrickson,    Iver,    Vol.    4:672. 
Hendrickson,  John  A.,  Vol.  1:425*. 
Hendry,  John  Jones,  Vol.  4:488. 
Henrichsen,  Erik  C,  Vol.  2:9*. 
Henrie,  Alphonso,  Vol.  4:623. 
Henrie,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:745. 
Henrie,  James,  Vol.  1:800*. 
Henrie,  Jeddie  Nephi,  Vol.  4:571. 
Henrie,  John  Nathaniel,  Vol.  4:571. 
Henrie,  William,  Vol.  4:707. 
Henry,  Arthur  John,  Vol.  2:639*. 
Hepworth,  Edmund,  Vol.  4:678. 
Hepworth,  Squire,  Vol.  4:678. 
Hepworth,  Thornton,  Vol.  3:113*. 


Herd,  James,  Vol.  3:114*. 
Herman,  Albert,  Vol.  4:390. 
Hermansen,  Christian,  jun..  Vol.  4:546. 
Herrick,  John  Lester,  Vol.  4:145*,  391. 
Herrick,  Lester  J.,  Vol.  2:288;  Vol.  4: 

314*. 
Heslop,  George  Ammon,  Vol.  3:406. 
Hess,  Arthur,  Vol.  3:646. 
Hess,  Horace  Arnold,  Vol.  4:672. 
Hess,  James  Henry,  Vol.  4:405. 
Hess,  John   Ivan,  Vol.  3:406*. 
Hess,  John  W.,  Vol.  1:463. 
Hesse,  Frank  H.,  Vol.  4:419. 
Hesse,  John  Bernhardt,  Vol.  4:625. 
Heywood,  James  Bell,  Vol.  3:114*. 
Heywood,  Joseph  Edgar,  Vol.  3:115*. 
Heywood,  Joseph  L.,  Vol.  1:646*. 
Heywood,  Joseph  Neal,  Vol.  4:597. 
Hibbard,  Geo.  A.,  Vol.  4:470. 
Hicken,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:12. 
Hickenlooper,  C.  A.,  Vol.  2:287*. 
Hickenlooper,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:607*. 
Hickman,  Deseret  N.,  Vol.  3:406*. 
Hicks,  George   B.,  Vol.  2:163. 
Higbee,  Elias,  Vol.  1:253. 
Higbee,  Isaac,  Vol.  1:480. 
Higbee,  John  S.,  Vol,  4:707. 
Higginbotham,  Francis  D.,  Vol.  3:407*. 
Higgins,  James,  Vol.  2:303. 
Higgins,  Mahala  B.,  Vol.  2:304*. 
Higgins,   Nelson,   Vol.   3:647;   Vol.   4: 

746*. 
Higginson,  Wm.  Lars,  Vol.  4:491. 
Higgs,  Emily  Hillam,  Vol.  4:261. 
Hill,  Abraham  Mormon,  Vol.  4:479. 
Hill,  Alexander  J.,  Vol.  2:456*. 
Hill,  George  R.,  Vol.  2:9,  811*;  Vol.  4: 

213*,  240. 
Hill,  Isaac,  Vol.  4:509. 
Hill,  Jasper  Franklin,  Vol.  4:544. 
Hill,  John  Leonard,  Vol.  3:648. 
Hill,  Lafayette,  Vol.  4:524. 
Hill,  Leonard  AUison,  Vol.  4:611. 
Hill,  William,  Vol.  4:554. 
Hill,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:791*. 
Hill,  William  J.,  Vol.  1:438*. 
Hillam,  Abraham  Baron,  Vol.  4:673. 
Hillam,  Rodney,  jun..  Vol.  4:726. 
Hillstead,  Robt.  Henry,  Vol.  4:628. 
Hilton,  Eugene,  Vol.  4:146*. 
Hilton,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:185. 
Hilton,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  4:366. 
Hinckley,  Arza  Erastus,  Vol.  4:746. 
Hinckley,  Bryant  S.,  Vol.  1:778*;  Vol. 

4:240. 
Hinckley,  Ira  N.,  Vol.  1:528. 
Hincklev,  John  Heiner,  Vol.  4:416. 
Hindley',  John  R.,  Vol.  3:800. 
Hintze,  Ferdinand  F.,  Vol.  4:390. 
Hirschi,  Arnold  D.,  Vol.  4:533. 
Hirschi,  Claudius,  Vol.  4:679. 
Hirschi,  David  (Rockville),  Vol.  3:408. 
Hirschi,  David  (of  Curlew  Stake),  Vol. 

4:447. 
Hirschi,  Fred  Jacob,  Vol.  4:447. 


INDEX 


791 


Hirschi,  Gottlieb,  Vol.  3:408. 
Hirschi,  Louis  Arnold,  Vol.  4:447. 
Hitchcock,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:460. 
Hoagland,  Abraham,  Vol.  2:364*. 
Hoagland,  James  T.,  Vol.  4:424. 
Hoagland,  John,  Vol.  2:365*. 
Hoagland,  Louis  Gerald,  Vol.  2:365*; 

Vol.  4:360*. 
Hobbs,  Matilda  B.,  Vol.  2:305*. 
Hobbs,  William,  Vol.  2:304*. 
Hodgson,  Oliver,  Vol.  4:509. 
Hodgson,  Vernetta  Lindsay,  Vol.  4:261. 
Hodowal,  Geo.  Zerneke,  Vol.  4:580. 
Hodson,  William,  Vol.  2:264*. 
Hoff,  Henry  Herman,  Vol.  3:409. 
Hoff,  Henry  Herman,  jun.,  Vol.  4:533. 
Hogan,  Chas.  Eric,  Vol.  4:451. 
Hogan,  Donald,  Vol.  4:451. 
Hogan,  Erik  G.  M.,  Vol.  3:409*. 
Hogan,  Goudy,  Vol.  4:593. 
Hogan,  Hannah,  Vol.  2:640*. 
Hogan,  Ingeborg  M.  J.,  Vol.  2:640*. 
Hogan,  Ira,  Vol.  4:398. 
Hogan,  Joseph,  jun..  Vol.  3:648. 
Hogan,  Joseph  C,  Vol.  4:491. 
Hogan,  Nelson  J.,  Vol.  4:492. 
Hogensen,  Alfred,  Vol.  4:424. 
Hogg,  Geo.  J.,  Vol.  4:471. 
Hogge,  Charles  Alexander  Vol.  4:31*. 
Hoglund,  Alvin  A.,  Vol.  4:484. 
Hogsted,  Hans  C.  S.,  Vol.  1:759*. 
Hogsted,  Victor  C,  Vol.  1:769*. 
Hokanson,  William  E.,  Vol..  3:649. 
Hokanson,  Nils,  Vol.  4:628. 
Holbrook,  Heber  Angell,  Vol.  4:448. 
Holbrook,  Jean  C,  Vol.  1:503. 
Holbrook,  Joseph  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:628. 
Holden,  Elijah  E.,  Vol.  3:650. 
Holladay,  Abraham,  Vol.  2:763*. 
Holladay,  Ann  H.  M.,  Vol.  2:397*. 
Holladay,  Everetta  C.  J.,  Vol.  2:398*. 
Holladay,  George  T.,  Vol.  2:397*. 
Holladay,  James  E.,  Vol.  2:399*. 
Holladay,  John  D.,  Vol.  2:395. 
Holladay,  John  Martin,  Vol.  4:544. 
Holladay,  Thomas  M.  W.,  Vol.  2:396*. 
Holland,  John,  Vol.  3:46*. 
Holland,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:616. 
Hollands,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:641*. 
Holling,  Marcus,  Vol.  4:352*. 
Hollingworth,  Benj.  H.,  Vol.  4:605. 
Hollywood  Stake,  Vol.  4:483-486. 
Holm,  Carl  Paul  T.,  Vol.  4:586. 
Holman,  Ezekiel  J.,  Vol.  2:111*. 
Holman,  John  Greenleaf,  Vol.  3:116*; 

Vol.  4:707. 
Holman,  Lester  Melvin,  Vol.  4:406. 
Holmes,  Jonathan  H.,  Vol.  4:746. 
Holmes,  see  Cowles. 
Holt,  Franklin  Overton,  Vol.  4:593. 
Holt,  Geo.  A.,  Vol.  4:214. 
Holt,  Joseph  Mabey,  Vol.  2:641*. 
Holt,  Robert  Mabey,  Vol.  2:407*. 
Holt,  Samuel  Elijah,  Vol.  2:323*. 
Holyoak,  James  Nehemiah,  Vol.  4:600. 


Homer,  Willard  Greene,  Vol.  4:639. 
Hooks,  Elmer,  Vol.  3:650. 
Hoopei',  John  Douglas,  Vol.  4:31,  98. 
Hooper,  Thomas  Albert,  Vol.  4:215*. 
Hooper,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:724*. 
Hopkin,  Frank  D.,  Vol.  4:538. 
Hopkin,  James  Samuel,  Vol.  3:117. 
Hopkin,  John,  Vol.  3:118*. 
Hopkinson,  Albert  E.,  Vol.  4:  438. 
Hopkinson,  Jesse,  Vol.  4:528. 
Horlacher,  John  Fred,  Vol.  4:546. 
Home,  Alice  Merrill,  Vol.  4:186. 
Home,  Henry  James,  Vol.  2:139. 
Home,  James  M.,  Vol.  2:142. 
Home,  Joseph,  Vol.  1:806*. 
Home,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  2:206*;  Vol. 

4:387*. 
Home,  Mary  I.,  Vol.  1:807*;  Vol.  4:187. 
Hornsby,  Ellen,  Vol.  4:746. 
Horrocks,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:589.  .^ 

Horrocks,  Roger,  Vol.  4:589. 
Horsfall,  Edward  Pettit,  Vol.  4:577. 
Horsfall,  Ira  Owen,  Vol.  3:410*. 
Horsley,  Arthur  Wm.,  Vol.  4:438. 
Horsley,  Ernest  P.,  Vol.  4:241. 
Horsley,  Ernest  Samuel,  Vol.  3:118*. 
Horsley,  Everett  Lee,  Vol.  4:492. 
Horsley,  Ivy  A.  Lamoreaux,  Vol.  4:284. 
Horsley,  Thomas  Herbert,  Vol.  4:98*. 
Hortin,  John,  Vol.  2:232*. 
Hortin,  Joseph  Edmond,  Vol.  4:631. 
Horton,  John  Alma,  Vol.  4:409. 
Horton,  John  Earl,  Vol.  4:546. 
Hoskins,  Oliver  C,  Vol.  1:770. 
Houston,  Isaac,  Vol.  4:396. 
Houston,  James,  Vol.   1:800*. 
Houston,  John  Cooper,  Vol.  2:48. 
Houtz,  Watson  C,  Vol.  2:642*. 
Hovey,  Joseph  Grafton,  Vol.  3:119*. 
Howard,  Elizabeth,  Vol.  4:187. 
Howard,  John  Shelton,  Vol.  3:411. 
Howai'd,  Samuel  Cyrus,  Vol.  3:411. 
Howard,  William,  Vol.  4:460. 
Howard,  Wilson  Allen,  Vol.  2:643*. 
Howarth,  Alice,  Vol.  4:285. 
Howd,  Simeon,  Vol.  4:708. 
Howe,  Amos,  Vol.  2:384*. 
Howe,  Amy  Mellor,  Vol.  2:385*. 
Howe,  Charles  Ross,  Vol.  2:386*. 
Howe,  Julia  Cruse,  Vol.  2:385*. 
Howell,  James  Wm.,  Vol.  4:580. 
Howells,  Benjamin  F.,  Vol.  4:336. 
Howells,  David  P.,  Vol.  4:484. 
Howells,  Marcia  Knowlton,  Vol.  4:187. 
Hoyt,  Timothy  Sabin,  Vol.  3:412. 
Hubbard,  Alma  Edward,  Vol.  4:398. 
Hubbard,  James  Willard,  Vol.  4:398. 
Hubbard,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  3:120. 
Hubbard,   David,  Vol.  4:583. 
Hubbard,  Elisha  Freeman,  Vol.  4:600. 
Hubbard,  John,  Vol.  3:651. 
Hubbard,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:120*. 
Hubbard,  Marshall  Moore,  Vol.  4:689. 
Hubbard,  Wesley  Williams,  Vol.  4:398. 
Huber,  Emil  Julius,  Vol.  3:651*. 


792 


INDEX 


Huber,  Johannes,  Vol.  2:14. 
Huber,  John,  Vol.  4:387. 
Hudman,  Orson  W.,  Vol.  4:497,  747. 
Hudson,  Wilford,  Vol.  4:747. 
Huffaker,  Louis  Albert,  Vol.  2:54*. 
Huffaker,  Simpson  D.,  Vol.  3:412*. 
Huggins,  Ira  A.,  Vol.  4:554. 
Hughes,  David,  Vol.  3:414*;  Vol.  4:521. 
Hughes,  Henry,  Vol.  4:488. 
Huhl,  Charles  Wm.,  Vol.  2:404,  810*. 
Huish,  John  Edward,  Vol.  2:155*. 
Hulet,  Oscar  Jones,  Vol.  4:573. 
Hull,  Alvin  C,  Vol.  4:466. 
Hull,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:716*;  Vol.  4:241. 
Hulme,  George  Ezra,  Vol.  3:414. 
Hulme,  John  Philip,  Vol.  4:401. 
Hulme,  William,  Vol.  4:401. 
Hulse,  Geo.  Weaver,  Vol.  4:398. 
Hulterstrom,   Gideon  N.,  Vol.  4:383*. 
Humpherys,  Oliver,  Vol.  4:616. 
Humpherys,  Hyrum  Thos.,  Vol.  4:401. 
Humpherys,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:31*;   Vol. 

4:534. 
Humphrey,  Solomon,  Vol.  4:689. 
Humphrey,  Thomas  G.,  Vol.  2:768*. 
Hunsaker,  Abraham,  Vol.  3:415*. 
Hunsaker,  Alexander,  Vol.  4:525. 
Hunsaker,  Alma  Loren,  Vol.  4:448. 
Hunsaker,  Edgar,  Vol.  4:525. 
Hunsaker,  Enoch  C,  Vol.  3:652. 
Hunsaker,  John  L.,  Vol.  3:416*. 
Hunsaker,  Leo,  Vol.  4:427. 
Hunsaker,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:600. 
Hunt,  Geo.  Mathew,  Vol.  4:663. 
Hunt,  Jefferson,  Vol.  4:747*. 
Hunt,  John,  Vol.  3:417*. 
Hunt,  John  Alexander,  Vol.  3:121*. 
Hunt,  John  Alex.,  jun.,  Vol.  3:418*. 
Hunt,  Jonathan  Nephi,  Vol.  4:649. 
Hunt,  Mitchell  Wiggins,  Vol.  4:649. 
Hunt,  Wm.  Ammon,  Vol.  4:619. 
Hunter,  Edward,  Vol.  1:227*;  Vol.  4: 

726. 
Hunter,  Heman  Hyde,  Vol.  4:673. 
Hunter,  Jesse  D.,  Vol.  4:748. 
Hunter,  James  Austin,  Vol.  4:451. 
Hunter,  John,  Vol.  4:396. 
Hunter,  John  Davidson,  Vol.  3:418. 
Hunter,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  1:534*. 
Hunter,  Lydia,  Vol.  4:748. 
Hunter,  Oscar  Fitzallen,  Vol.  2:643*; 

Vol.  4:726. 
Hunter,  Rosel  Hyde,  Vol.  4:441. 
Hunter,  Wm.  Coutts,  Vol.  4:555. 
Hunter,  William  P.,  Vol.  1:534. 
Hunting,  Elizabeth  A.  R.,  Vol.  3:122*. 
Hunting,  Nathan,  Vol.  3:122*. 
Huntington,  Dimick  B.,  Vol.  4:748. 
Huntington,  Edward  Ray,  Vol.  4:568. 
Huntington,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:411*. 
Huntington,  Oliver  B.,  jun..  Vol.  4:504. 
Huntington,  William,  Vol.  1:368*. 
Hurst,  Albert  LeRoy,  Vol.  4:451. 
Huskinson,  John  Irving,  Vol.  3:652. 
Huskinson,  John  Willard,  Vol.  4:471. 


Hutchings,  Stephen,  Vol.  3:419. 
Hutchinson,  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:669. 
Hyde,  Annie  T.,  Vol.  1:702*;  Vol.  4: 

188 
Hyde,'  Chas.  Gloyd,  Vol.  4:436. 
Hyde,  Chas.  H.,  Vol.  4:310,  575. 
Hyde,  Charles  S.,  Vol.  4:353*. 
Hyde,  Frank,  Vol.  4:32. 
Hvde,  George  Tilton,  Vol.  3:123*. 
Hyde,  Heman,  Vol.  3:419. 
Hyde,  Jeanette  A.,  Vol.  2:644*;  Vol.  4: 

188 
Hyde,'  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  3:653. 
Hyde,  Orson,  Vol.  1:80*;  Vol.  4:314*. 
Hyde,  Rosel,  Vol.  1:466. 
Hyde,  Sarah  E.,  Vol.  4:285. 
Hyde,  Wilford  A.  (Star  Valley  Stake), 

Vol.  2:230*. 
Hyde,  Wilford  A.  (Metropolis),  Vol.  4: 

547. 
Hyde,  William,  Vol.  1:759*. 
Hyde,  William,  jun..  Vol.  1:421*. 
Hyde,  William  A.,  Vol.  1:313*. 
Hyer,  Andrew  Lars,  Vol.  3:124. 
Hyer,  Andrew  Wm.,  Vol.  4:412. 
Hyer,  Ira,  Vol.  4:376. 
Hyer,  Saul  Edward,  Vol.  4:412. 
Hymas,  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:563. 
Hymas,  Dell  Grover,  Vol.  4:563. 
Hymas,  Ernest  David,  Vol.  4:401. 
Hymas,  James,  Vol.  4:402. 
Hymas,  Samuel  E.,  Vol.  4:402. 
Hyrum  Stake,  Vol.  4:486-490. 

I 

Icelandic  Mission,  Vol.  4:342-344. 
Idaho  Stake,  Vol.  4:490-493. 
Idaho  Falls  Stake,  Vol.  4:493-496. 
Iff,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:325*. 
Indian  Territory  Mission,  Vol.  4:344- 

345. 
Ingles,  John  E.,  Vol.  4:438. 
Inglestrom,  Anders  O.,  Vol.  1:455*. 
Ipsen,  Alvin,  Vol.   1:398*. 
Ipsen,  Nephi  Ruel,  Vol.  4:521. 
Ipson,  Hans  Peter,  Vol.  4:571. 
Ipson,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:124*. 
Irons,  Elmo  Leroy,  Vol.  4:535. 
Irons,  John  Wilbert,  Vol.  2:266*. 
Irvine,  Rosannah  Cannon,  Vol.  4:188. 
Irvine,  Thos.  Maycock,  Vol.  4:555. 
Isaac,  John  P.,  Vol.  2:378. 
Isaac,  Rachel  Williams,  Vol.  2:378. 
Isaacson,  Martha  K.  C,  Vol.  2:552*. 
Isaacson,  Peter,  Vol.  2:552*. 
Islaub,  Geo.  H.,  Vol.  4:310. 
Isom,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:679. 
Israelson,  Andrew  M.,  Vol.  3:653. 
Israelson,  John  A.,  Vol.  4:488. 
Italian  Mission,  Vol.  4:345-346. 
Iverson,  Chas.  M.,  Vol.  4:652. 
Iverson,  Gustave  Arnt,  Vol.  2:646*. 
Iverson,  Heber  C,  Vol.  4:241,  509,  727. 
Iverson,  Niels  C,  Vol.  2:646*. 
Iverson,  Orson  Alphonzo,  Vol.  4:428. 


INDi;X 


793 


Iverson,  Victor  E.,  Vol.  4:593. 

Ivie,  Calvert  Milton,  Vol.  3:419. 

Ivie,  Clarence,  Vol.  4:455. 

Ivie,  Jacob  Wm.,  Vol.  4:663. 

Ivie,  John   L.,  Vol.  2:647^'\ 

Ivie,  Lloyd  Oscar,  Vol.  4:346. 

Ivins,  Anthony  W.,  Vol.  1:311*;   Vol. 

3:750*;  Vol.  4:241,  347,  682. 
Ivins,  Antoine  Ridgway,  Vol.  4:749*. 
Ivins,  Heber  Grant,  Vol.  4:346,  444. 
Ivory,  Bernice  Anderson,  Vol.  4:285. 
Ivory,  Matthew,  Vol.  4:708. 


Jack,  Mary  Ruthera,  Vol.  4:285. 
Jack,  William  T.,  Vol.  1:304*;  Vol.  4: 

345    382 
Jackman,  Levi,  Vol.  2:769*;  Vol.  4:708. 
Jackman,   Wallace   A.,   Vol.   4:484. 
Jackman,  Walter  Brady,  Vol.  4:420. 
Jackson,  Aaron  William,  Vol.  3:654. 
Jackson,  Alma  Oades,  Vol.  1:436*. 
Jackson,  Alma  Obray,  sen.,  Vol.  4:488. 
Jackson,  Alma  Obray,  jun.,  Vol.  4:488. 
Jackson,  Henry  C,  Vol.  1:768*. 
Jackson,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:125*,  420. 
Jackson,  Samuel,  jun..  Vol.  4:610. 
Jackson,  Warren  Oswell,  Vol.  4:749*. 
Jackson,  William,  Vol.  4:610. 
Jacob,  Elmer  A.,  Vol.  4:451. 
Jacob,  Isaac,  Vol.  4:657. 
Jacob,  Norton,  Vol.  4:708. 
Jacobs,  Briant  Stringham,  Vol.  4:549. 
Jacobs,  Daniel,  Vol.  2:445*. 
Jacobs,  Eugene  Brown,  Vol.  4:606. 
Jacobs,  Henry   Chariton,  Vol.   3:421*. 
Jacobs,  Henry  C,  jun..  Vol.  2:768;  Vol. 

4:147. 
Jacobs,  John  C,  Vol.  2:15. 
Jacobs,  Mary  Hains,  Vol.  2:445*. 
Jacobs,  Murray  Kimball,  Vol.  4:666. 
Jacobs,   Zebulon,   Vol.   2:401*. 
Jacobs,  Zebulon  Wm.,  Vol.  4:393. 
Jacobsen,  Jacob  Baltzer,  Vol.  3:423. 
Jacobsen,  Soren  Magnus,  Vol.  4:536. 
Jacobson,  Christian,  Vol.  2:40. 
Jacobson,  Oliver  Karl,  Vol.  4:148. 
James,  Henry  Robert,  Vol.  3:654. 
James,  Minnie  Home,  Vol.  4:189. 
Jameson,  Alexander,  Vol.  4:608. 
Jameson,  Charles,  Vol.  4:750. 
Janson,  Anton  A.,  Vol.  4:428. 
Japan  Mission,  Vol.  4:346. 
Jaques,  John,  Vol.  1:254*;  Vol.  4:682*. 
Jardine,  James  B.,  Vol.  3:424*. 
Jardine,  John,  Vol.  3:424. 
Jardine,  Wm.  Hamilton,  Vol.  4:555. 
Jarvis,  Geo.  Josiah,  Vol.  4:608. 
Jaynes,  Arzie  Henry,  Vol.  4:32. 
Jefferies,  Murray,  Vol.  4:528. 
JeflFeries,  Richard,  Vol.  3:125*. 
Jeffery,  Edgar  Wallace,  Vol.  4:33. 
Jeffs,  David  William,  Vol.  2:51*. 
Jenkins,  Edward  E.,  Vol.  2:482*. 
Jenkins,  John,  Vol.  1:405. 


Jenkins,  John  Howard,  Vol.  4:33*,  360. 
Jenkins,  Lorran  Amos,  Vol.  4:492. 
Jenkins,  Thomas,  Vol.  1:604*. 
Jennings,  Priscilla  P.,  Vol.  2:505*;  Vol. 

4:189. 
Jennings,  William,  Vol.  2:500*. 
Jensen,  Albert  Swen,  Vol.  4:455. 
Jensen,  Alma,  Vol.  4:428. 
Jensen,  Alma  Larsen,  Vol.  3:425. 
Jensen,    Anders    (Andrew)    Christian, 

Vol.  4:393. 
Jensen,  Andreas,  Vol.  4:536. 
Jensen,  Andrew,  Vol.  2:542*. 
Jensen,  Andrew  C,  Vol.  2:56. 
Jensen,  Andrew  C,  jun..  Vol.  4:517. 
Jensen,  Benj.  Denmark,  Vol.  4:492. 
Jensen,  Carl  (Salt  Lake  City),  Vol.  2: 

435. 
Jensen,  Carl  (Bear  River),  Vol.  4:428. 
Jensen,  Charles,  Vol.  2:648*. 
Jensen,  Christen,  Vol.  1:550*;  Vol.  3: 

655. 
Jensen,  Christen  Israel,  Vol.  3:655. 
Jensen,  Christian,  jun.,  Vol.  4:367. 
Jensen,  Christian  Otto,  Vol.  4:575. 
Jensen,  Christian  Peter,  Vol.  4:610. 
Jensen,  Cyrus,  Vol.  4:538. 
Jensen,  David,  Vol.  2:173*. 
Jensen,  Denmark,  Vol.  1:301*. 
Jensen,  Elijah  Martin,  Vol.  4:551. 
Jensen,  Ernest  Anton,  Vol.  4:466. 
Jensen,  Freda,  Vol.  4:261. 
Jensen,  Hans  (Hals),  Vol.  2:223. 
Jensen,  Hans  B.,  Vol.  2:318*. 
Jensen,  Hans  Peter,  Vol.  2:362*. 
Jensen,  Hans  Peter  (Mantua)  Vol.  4: 

148*,  428. 
Jensen,  Henry  Lewis,  Vol.  4:560. 
Jensen,  Hyrum,  Vol.  1:399*. 
Jensen,  Hyrum  Daniel,  Vol.  4:365. 
Jensen,   James    (East  Jordan   Stake), 

Vol.  1:310*. 
Jensen,  James   (Forest  Dale),  Vol.  1: 

565*. 
Jensen,  James    (Grover),  Vol.  2:229*. 
Jensen,  James,  jun..  Vol.  2:229. 
Jensen,  James  Ernest,  Vol.  4:458. 
Jensen,  James  Marinus,  Vol.  4:34,  657. 
Jensen,  James   C,  Vol.   1:361*. 
Jensen,  James  Peter,  (Sanford)  Vol.  3: 

425. 
Jensen,  James  Peter  (Sandy),  Vol.  4: 

458. 
Jensen,  James  S.,  Vol.  2:770*. 
Jensen,  Jens,  Vol.  4:551. 
Jensen,  Jens  I.,  Vol.  1:818*. 
Jensen,  Jens  Peter,  Vol.  1:570*. 
Jensen,  Jens  Severin,  Vol.  2:512*. 
Jensen,  John  Henry,  Vol.  4:639. 
Jensen,  John  Young,  Vol.  4:460. 
Jensen,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:406. 
Jensen,  Joseph  Golden,  Vol.  4:577. 
Jensen,  Joseph  M.  E.,  Vol.  3:656. 
Jensen,  Joseph  Y.,  Vol.  2:648*. 
Jensen,  Junius  C,  Vol.  2:176*. 


794 


INDEX 


Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 

Vol. 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 
Jensen 

128* 
Jensen 
Jenson 

752* 
Jenson 
Jenson 
Jenson 
Jenson 
Jenson 
Jenson 
Jenson 
Jenson 


Kate  Cunningham,  Vol.  4:262. 
Lars,  Vol.  4:668. 
Lewis  M.,  Vol.  4:655. 
Lionel  Christian,  Vol.  4:590. 
Mads  Peter,  Vol.  4:428. 
Martin,  Vol.  2:649*;  Vol.  4:551. 
Martin  Marinus,  Vol.  3:426*; 
1:428. 

Nephi,  Vol.  4:324*. 
Niels,  Vol.  3:126*. 
Niels  Peter,  Vol.  4:35. 
Ole  Christian,  Vol.  3:656. 
Oleen  Alder,  Vol.  4:563. 
Orestus,  Vol.  4:428. 
Parley  Pratt,  Vol.  4:492. 
Peter,  Vol.  2:36*. 
Peter  Christian,  Vol.  4:428. 
Peter  Daniel,  Vol.  4:623. 
Rulon  M.,  Vol.  4:616. 
Soren  (Crescent),  Vol.  3:127*. 
Soren    (Forest  Dale),  Vol.  3: 


Walter  Anton,  Vol.  4:517. 

Andrew,  Vol.   1:261*;   Vol.  3: 

Vol.  4:329*,  371*,  682*,  727. 

James,  Vol.  3:129*. 

James  Peter,  Vol.  4:521. 

Jens,  Vol.  2:649*. 

Joseph  H.,  Vol.  2:650*. 

Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:657. 

Lars,  Vol.  4:528. 

Nils  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:444. 

Peter,  Vol.  2:305*. 
Jeppesen,  Conrad,  Vol.  4:429. 
Jeppeson,  Hans  Peter,  Vol.  4:424. 
Jeppson,  Jeppe,  Vol.  1:395*. 
Jeppson,  Royal  M.,  Vol.  4:420. 
Jeppson,    Wilma,    Vol.    4:285. 
Jepson,  James,  jun..  Vol.   3:426. 
Jepson,  John,  Vol.  4:597. 
Jeremy,  Thomas  Evans,  Vol.  2:651*. 
Jerling    (Jorling),    Carl    E.    H.,    Vol. 

4:396. 
Jerman,  Daniel  Smith,  Vol.  2:358*. 
Jex,  Eliza  Goodsen,  Vol.  3:130*. 
Jex,  Richard  Leon,  Vol.  4:569. 
Jex,  William,  Vol.  3:129*. 
Johanneson,  Jon,  Vol.  4:343. 
Johansen,  John  Albert,  Vol.  4:393. 
Johanson,  Olof  P.,  Vol.  2:653*. 
John,  David,  Vol.  1:488*. 
John,  Levi,  Vol.  2:135. 
Johns,  Walter  Mathias,  Vol.  4:583. 
Johnsen,  Christ  C,  Vol.  4:429. 
Johnsen,  .Erastus,   Vol.   3:427*. 
Johnson,  Aaron,  Vol.  4:504. 
Johnson,   Andrew,  Vol.  4:382*. 
Johnson,  Andrew  T.,  Vol.  4:383,  652. 
Johnson,  Artemas,  Vol.  4:709. 
Johnson,  Bengt,  jun.,  Vol.  2:6*. 
Johnson,  Benjamin  J.,  Vol.  2:120. 
Johnson,  Bodel  M.  J.,  Vol.  3:132*. 
Johnson,  Brigham,  Vol.  4:657. 
Johnson,  Carl  Erik,  Vol.  4:552. 


Johnson,  Charles  (Adamsville),  Vol.  4: 

409. 
Johnson,    Charles    (American    Falls), 
Vol.  4:577. 

Chas.  G.,  Vol.  4:643. 

David  Almon,  Vol.  4:608. 

Edna  Evans,  Vol.  4:286. 

Ephraim,  Vol.  4:639. 

Ernest  James,  Vol.  4:536. 

Frank  Tilton,  Vol.  4:679. 

Geo.  W.,  Vol.  4:536. 

Gustaf  A.,  Vol.  4:547. 

Gustaf  Henry,  Vol.  4:495. 

Hans  Geo.,  Vol.  4:406. 

Henry  Mitchell,  Vol.  4:750. 

James,  Vol.  1:441*. 

James   Francis,  Vol.  4:506. 

James  H.,  Vol.  2:654*. 

Joel  Hills  (Mill  Creek),  Vol. 


Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 

4:444. 
Johnson 

4:502. 
Johnson 

1:495^ 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 

98. 
Johnson 

530. 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 
Johnson 


Joel     Hills     (Kanab),    Vol. 

John     (Lake     View),     Vol. 

John  (Benjamin),  Vol.  2:159*. 
John  (Redmond),  Vol.  4:552. 
John   Adam,  Vol.   4:517. 
John  Edward,  Vol.  4:149*. 
John  Eugene,  Vol.  4:488. 
John  Henry,  Vol.  3:130*. 
John  P.  R.,  Vol.  2:655*. 
Jos.  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:639. 
Lars  Ferdinand,  Vol.  4:429. 
Lawrence  Burton,  Vol.  4:669. 
Lorenzo,  Vol.   2:174. 
Luke  S.,  Vol.  1:85;  Vol.  4:709. 
Lyman  E.,  Vol.  1:91. 
Nephi,  Vol.   3:131*. 
Niels  Peter,  Vol.  4:512. 
Ole  Ray,  Vol.  4:460. 
Otto  E.,  Vol.  3:427. 
Peter  (Huntington),  Vol.  2: 

Peter   (Paul  Ward),  Vol.  4: 

4:429. 


Peter  Christian,   Vol. 

Peter  E.,  Vol.  4:424. 

Philo,  Vol.  4:709. 

Race  Alphalus,  Vol.  4:36*. 

Richard   Ely,  Vol.  3:657. 

Robert  Lewis,  Vol.  4:536. 

Samuel,  Vol.  4:409. 

Seth,  Vol.   3:428*. 

Seth  Alvin,  Vol.  4:416. 

Seth  Gurnsey,  Vol.  4:690. 

Sixtus  Ellis,  Vol.  4:500. 

Swen  Fred.,  Vol.  3:132*. 

Wallace,   Vol.   4:626. 

Wallace  Lars,   Vol.   3:657. 

William  D.,  Vol.  1:366*. 

Wm.  Derby,  jun.,  Vol.  4:500. 

Wm.  Sawyer,  Vol.  4:506. 

Willis  Kelsey,  Vol.  4:504. 
Johnston,  David  Aaron,  Vol.  4:36. 
Johnston,  Jacob,  Vol.  4:471. 


INDEX 


795 


Johnston,  Peter  Green,  Vol.  4:420. 
Johnston,  Peter  Rich,  Vol.  4:420. 
Jolley,  Haskel  S.,  Vol.  2:47*;  Vol.  4: 

416. 
Jolley,  Henry  B.  M.,  Vol.  4:502. 
Jolly,  Bryant  Heber,  jun..  Vol.  4:626. 
Jones,  Albert  Stephen,  Vol.  2:655*. 
Jones,   Alfred   Abraham,   Vol.   2:656". 
Jones,  Alfred  Thomas,  Vol.  2:656*. 
Jones,  Charles,  Vol.  4:563. 
Jones,  Charles  E.  (Bvron),  Vol.  4:416. 
Jones,  Chas.  E.  (Enoch  Ward),  Vol.  4: 

573. 
Jones,  Chas.  Kitchens,  Vol.  4:631. 
Jones,  Dan,  Vol.  3:658. 
Jones,  Daniel  Brooks,  Vol.  2:105*. 
Jones,   Daniel   Philemon,  Vol.  3:133*. 
Jones,  Daniel  W.,  Vol.  4:347. 
Jones,  David  P.,  Vol.  2:135*. 
Jones,   Ezra   Benson,   Vol.  4:150. 
Jones,  Frederick  Isaac,  Vol.  4:608. 
Jones,  Frederic  Wm.,  Vol.  4:593. 
Jones,  George  L.  M.,  Vol.  2:657*. 
Jones,  George  R.,  Vol.  1:684*. 
Jones,  Hyrum  Wm.,  Vol.  4:521. 
Jones,  James  Naylor,  Vol.  4:151,  549. 
Jones,  James  Simpkins,  Vol.  4:455. 
Jones,  Jenkins,  Vol.  4:521. 
Jones,  John  Davis,  Vol.  4:521. 
Jones,  John  F.,  Vol.  2:52*. 
Jones,  John  Wm.,  Vol.  4:525. 
Jones,  John  W.,  Vol.  4:534. 
Jones,  Joseph  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:521. 
Jones,  Joseph  W.,  Vol.  4:586. 
Jones,  Kumen,  Vol.  3:134*. 
Jones,  Lehi  Willard  T.,  Vol.  3:430*. 
Jones,  Leonard  Kumen,  Vol.  4:608. 
Jones,  Lewis  Daniel,  Vol.  3:430*. 
Jones,  Margaret  E.    (Bessie),  Vol.  4: 

286. 
Jones,  Miles  Levanter,  Vol.  3:431;  Vol. 

4:330. 
Jones,    Nathaniel    Vary,    Vol.    2:368*; 

Vol.  4:315*. 
Jones,  Nathaniel  V.,  jun.,  Vol.  2:453*. 
Jones,  Philetus,  Vol.  4:679. 
Jones,  Ralph  Carr,  Vol.  4:412. 
Jones,  Robert  Elijah,  Vol.  2:657. 
Jones,  Shadrach,  Vol.  3:660. 
Jones,  Thatbher  C,  Vol.  4:657. 
Jones,  Thomas  Evan,  Vol.  4:525. 
Jones,  Thomas  J.  (Patriarch),  Vol.  1: 

532. 
Jones,    Thomas    J.    (Parowan    Stake), 

Vol.  4:573. 
Jones,  Thomas   Wm.,   Vol.   3:431*. 
Jones,  Uriah  T.,  Vol.  1:533. 
Jones,  Willard  Edwin,  Vol.  3:432*. 
Jones,  Willard  Larson,  Vol.  4:99*. 
Jonson,  Einar,  Vol.  4:343. 
Jonson,  Haldor,  Vol.  4:344. 
Jonson,  Haldor  B.,  Vol.  4:344. 
Jonson,  Jacob  Baldwin,  Vol.  4:344. 
Joranson   (Yorgason),  James,  Vol.  3: 
432*. 


Jorgensen,  Abraham,  Vol.  4:436. 
Jorgensen,    Elmer    Hans,    Vol.    4:474, 

570. 
Jorgensen,  Eli  Moroni,  Vol.  4:673. 
Jorgensen,  Enoch,  Vol.  1:502*. 
Jorgensen,  Geo.  Daniel,  Vol.  4:605. 
Jorgensen,  Geo.   Edgar,  Vol.  4:438.    ^ 
Jorgensen,  Hyrum  Andrew,  Vol.  4:631. 
Jorgensen,  Jens,  Vol.  2:581*. 
Jorgensen,  Johan  G.,  Vol.  1:797*. 
Jorgensen,  Jorgen,  Vol.  4:663. 
Jorgensen,    Kjersten    B.,    Vol.    2:582*. 
Jorgensen,  Nicholai,  Vol.  4:489. 
Jorgensen,  Rasmus  G.,  Vol.  3:433*. 
Jorgensen,  Sorine  K.,  Vol.  2:658*. 
Joseph,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  4:409. 
Josephson,  Marba  Cannon,  Vol.  4:262. 
Josephson,  Mahonri  M.,  Vol.  4:406. 
Juab    Stake,   Vol.    4:496-499. 
Juarez  Stake,  Vol.  4:499-502. 
Judd,  Asa  Walter,  Vol.  4:353*,  503. 
Judd,  Daniel  Knapp,  Vol.  4:503. 
Judd,  James,  Vol.  4:679. 
Judd,  Jerome  John,  Vol.  4:500. 
Judd,  Robert  Lund,  Vol.  4:100,  216*. 
Judd,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:547,  593. 
Judd,  Wm.  Maurice,  Vol.  4:503. 
Judd,  Zadok  Knapp,  Vol.  3:134*. 
Judkins,  Joshua  Burton,  Vol.  4:560. 

K 

Kanab  Stake,  Vol.  4:502-504. 
Karren,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:750. 
Karren,  Thos.  Sylvester,  Vol.  4:413. 
Kartchner,   Mark  Elisha,  Vol.  4:614. 
Kasteler,  Alma,  Vol.  4:479. 
Kasteler,  Fred,  Vol.  4:605. 
Kay,  Hyrum,  Vol.  2:188*. 
Kay,  John  Moburn,  Vol.  3:661*. 
Kay,  William,  jun..  Vol.  4:549. 
Kearns,  Austin,  Vol.  2:555*. 
Kearns,  Hamilton  H.,  Vol.  2:555. 
Kearns,  Mary  J.,  Vol.  2:556*. 
Kearsley,  Edwin  Nephi,  Vol.  4:639. 
Keaton,   Geo.   Dennis,  Vol.  4:336., 
Keeler,  Charles  Obed,  Vol.  2:658."^ 
Keeler,  Joseph  B.,  Vol.  2:770*."' 
Keeler,  Ralph  Budd,  Vol.  4:500. 
Keetch,  Chas.  G.,  Vol.  4:534. 
Keetch,  Elijah  C,  Vol.  1:451. 
Keilholz,  Adolph  W.  C.  L.,  Vol.  3:663. 
Keith,  Willard  Augustus,  Vol.  4:367. 
Keller,  Alvin,  Vol.  3:135*. 
Keller,    James    Morgan,    Vol.    1:443*; 

Vol.  4:563. 
Keller,  James  Morgan   (Bishop),  Vol. 

3:434*. 
Keller,  Janues  E.,  Vol.  4:467. 
Kelley,  Charles,  Vol.  1:389*. 
Kellv,  Philemon  Merrill,  Vol.  4:673. 
Kelly,  William,  Vol.  2:771*. 
Kelsch,   Louis   A.,   Vol.   4:241. 
Kelsey,  Stephen,  Vol.  4:709. 
Kemp,  James,  Vol.  2:659*. 
Kemp,  John  Henry,  Vol.  4:436. 


796 


INDEX 


Kemp,  William,  Vol.  2:659*. 
Kempe,  Chistopher  J.,  Vol.  4:597. 
Kempton,  Albert  H.,  Vol.  4:525. 
Kempton,  Alvin  B.,  Vol.  3:135*. 
Kempton,  Heber  Curtis,  Vol.  4:600. 
Kendall,  Levi  Newel,  Vol.  4:709. 
Kendell,  Geo.  W.,  Vol.  4:542. 
Kennard,  Leonidas  H.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:376, 

406. 
Kennedy,  John,  Vol.  3:434*. 
Kenner,  Scipio  A.,  Vol.  2:278*. 
Kennington,  Geo.  Seward,  Vol.  4:628. 
Kennington,  William  H.,  Vol.  2:228*. 
Kerr,  John   Bankhead,  Vol.   4:489. 
Kerr,  Marion  Belnap,  Vol.  4:287*. 
Kerr,  Marion  Joseph,  Vol.  4:673. 
Kesler,  Alonzo  P.,  Vol.  4:331. 
Kesler,  Donnetta  Smith,  Vol.  4:189. 
Kesler,  Frederick,  Vol.   1:643*. 
Kest,  John  James,  Vol.  4:607. 

Keyes,  Alma,  Vol.  4:542.    ^ ^^\ 

Keysor,  Guy  Messiah,  VoVf  3:4.35>r 
Keysor,  Ruth  Wyllie,  Vo1.^t43S*. 
Keysor,  Sarah  Ann.,  Vol.  3:437*. 
Keysor,  William  George,  Vol.  3:436*. 
Kidd,  John  Chester,  Vol.  4:631. 
Kidd,  Thomas  E.,  Vol.  4:653. 
Kidman,  Leslie,  Vol.  4:481. 
Kidman,  Lewis  R.,  Vol.  4:484. 
Kienke,  John,  Vol.  4:497. 
Kiepe,  Augu.st  F.  W.,  Vol.  4:241. 
Killpack,  John  David,  Vol.  4:461. 
Killpack,  Wm.  Leslie,  Vol.  4:639. 
Kimball,  Andrew,  Vol.  1:364*;  Vol.  4: 

345*. 
Kimball,  Brigham  W.,  Vol.  3:663. 
Kimball,  Crozier,  Vol.  4:601. 
Kimball,   David   Patten,  Vol.   4:601. 
Kimball,  Edward  P.,  Vol.  4:216,  338*. 
Kimball,  Elias  S.,  sen..  Vol.  2:55*;  Vol. 

4:381*. 
Kimball,  Ellen  S.,  Vol.  2:772*;  Vol.  4: 

710. 
Kimball,  Heber  Chase,  Vol.  1:34*;  Vol 

3:437;  Vol.  4:315*,  710. 
Kimball,  Hiram  S.,  Vol.  2:372. 
Kimball,  Jeremiah  H.,  Vol.  3:664. 
Kimball,    Jonathan    G.,    Vol.    1:210*; 

Vol.  4:241,  381*. 
Kimball,  Jonathan  G.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:515. 
Kimball,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:402. 
Kimball,  Lucy  W.,  Vol.  1:808*. 
Kimball,  Mary  C,  Vol.  4:189,  262. 
Kimball,  Quince  K.,  Vol.  3:438*. 
Kimball,   Sarah   M.,  Vol.  2:372*;   Vol. 

4:190. 
Kimball,  Spencer  W.,  Vol.  4:601. 
Kimber,  Charles,  sen..  Vol.  4:555. 
King,  Culbert,  Vol.  2:185. 
King,  Thos.  Arthur,  Vol.  4:475. 
King,  Thomas  F.,  Vol.  2:81*. 
King,  Thomas  Owen,  Vol.  2:266*. 
King,  William,  Vol.  4:340. 
King,  William  A.,  Vol.  4:710. 
King,  Wm.  P^arnes,  Vol.  4:448. 


King,  William  H.,  Vol.   1:787*. 
Kinghorn,  David,  Vol.  4:587. 
Kingsbury,  Jos.  C,  Vol.  4:509. 
Kingsford,  Elizabeth  H.  J.,  Vol.  2:528*. 
Kingsford,  Geo.  Elmer,  Vol.  4:413. 
Kingston,  Charles,  Vol.  1:331. 
Kirkham,  Hyrum  R.,  Vol.  4:495. 
Kirkham,  Oscar  A.,  Vol.  4:241*. 
Kirkman,  John,  Vol.  4:727. 
Kirkman,  John  E.,  Vol.  3:664*. 
Kirkman,  Lawrence  Gomer,  Vol.  4:649. 
Kjar,  John  Christian,  Vol.  2:566*. 
Kjar,   Louis   Christian,  Vol.  2:660*. 
Kjar,  Margaret  Weibye,  Vol.  2:567. 
Kjar,  Carl,  Vol.  4:607. 
Kjar,  Joseph  Edward,  Vol.  4:477. 
Kleinman,  Archie  Leland,  Vol.  4:679. 
Kleinman,  Konrad,  Vol.  2:661;  Vol.  4: 

710. 
Klingler,  Alma,  Vol.  4:471. 
Klingler,  Karl  Conrad,  Vol.  4:673. 
Kloepfer,    Frank    Philip,    Vol.    4:424. 
Kloepfer,  Henry  Philip,  Vol.  4:424. 
Knell,  Robert,  Vol.  4:594. 
Knell,  Robt.  Chas.,  Vol.  4:594. 
Knight,    Charlotte    M.,    Vol.    2:532*. 
Knight,    George,    Vol.    4:5.39. 
Knight,  Jennie  Brimhall,  Vol.  4:190. 
Knight,  Jesse,  Vol.  2:776. 
Knight,  Jesse  William,  Vol.  2:778*. 
Knight,  John  Miner,  Vol.  2:778;   Vol. 

4:391. 
Knight,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:772. 
Knight,  Lydia  G.,  Vol.  2:775. 
Knight,  Newel,  Vol.  2:773. 
Knighton,  Daniel  W.,  Vol.  4:547. 
Knighton,  James,  Vol.  4:518. 
Knowlton,  Agnes  Smith,  Vol.  4:262. 
Knowlton,  Fi-ank  Forrest,  Vol.  4:647. 
Knudsen,  Andrew,  Vol.  1:492,  822*. 
Knudsen,  Benjamin  Henry,  Vol.  4:658. 
Knudsen,  Christian,  Vol.   1:508. 
Knudsen,  Mathias,  Vol.  1:508*. 
Knudsen,  Wilford  J.,  Vol.  3:665. 
Knutti,  Godfred,  Vol.  3:665. 
Kofoed,    Orson,    Vol.   4:563. 
Kofoed,   Paul  Ernst,  Vol.  4:623. 
Kohler,  Fred,  Vol.  4:416. 
Kohler,  Jacob,  Vol.  4:655. 
Koldewyn,   Zwier   Wm.,   Vol.    4:353*. 
Kolob  Stake,  Vol.  4:504-505. 
Kooyman,    Elisabeth    Jacoba    van    der 

Toom,  Vol.  4:102*. 
Kooyman,   Frank   lemke.  Vol.   4:101*, 

354. 
Kotter,  Henrv  John,  Vol.  4:37. 
Koyle,  John  H.,  Vol.  4:569. 
Kristiansen,  Edvin  Julius,  Vol.  2:443, 

810*. 
Krumperman,  Jan  Fred.,  Vol.  4:354. 
Kuhre,  William  D.,  Vol.   1:585*. 
Kunz,  David  Chas.,  Vol.  4:534. 
Kunz,  John,  sen..  Vol.  4:534. 
Kunz,  John,  jun.,  Vol.  4:534. 
Kunz,  Milford  Nephi,  Vol.  4:640. 


INDEX 


797 


Kunzler,  Arnold  J.,  Vol.  3:665. 
Kunzler,  Jacob,  Vol.  4:448. 
Kutterer,  John  George,  Vol.  3:439^ 


Labrum,  Ann   E.   W.,  Vol.  2:470*. 
Labrum,  John  George,  Vol.  2:470*. 
Labrum,  Thos.  Orren,  Vol.  4:444. 
Lafount,    Harold    A.,    Vol.    4:477. 
Laird,  James,  Vol.  4:495. 
Lake,  Barnabas,  Vol.  3:136. 
Lake,  James,  Vol.  2:387. 
Lake,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  4:605. 
Lake,  Philomela,  Vol.  2:388*. 
Lake,  William  Bailey,  Vol.  2:390. 
Lamb,  Osmer,  Vol.  4:503. 
Lambert,  Charles,  Vol.  2:779*. 
Lambert,  Charles  John,  Vol.  2:453*. 
Lambert,  Dan,  Vol.  4:590. 
Lambert,  Edith  E.  H.,  Vol.  4:288*. 
Lambert,  Ephraim,  Vol.  1:477;  Vol.  4: 

590. 
Lambert,  George  C,  Vol.  1:612*. 
Lambert,  James   N.,  Vol.  3:137;   Vol. 

4:361. 
Lambert,   John    Carlos,   Vol.    2:661*. 
Lambert,  Joseph  Heber,  Vol.  4:590. 
Lambert,  Richard  G.   C,  Vol.   3:440*. 
Lammers,   Peter  Jacob,   Vol.   4:354*. 
Lamoreaux,  Andrew  L.,  Vol.  3:666. 
Lamoreaux,  Guy  V.,  Vol.  4:525. 
Lamph,  David  Daniel,  Vol.  4:433. 
Lamph,  WilUam  T.,  Vol.  3:137*. 
Lang-ford,  Jeremiah  E.,  Vol.  2:537*. 
Langford,   Sarah  E.   0.,  Vol.  2:537*. 
Langlois,    David   R.,   Vol.   4:151*. 
Langston,  Charles  J.,  Vol.  4:750. 
Langston,  Jacob  H.,  Vol.  4:451. 
Langston,  John  Franklin,  Vol.  4:679. 
Langton,  William  S.,  Vol.  3:667. 
Lant,  David,  Vol.  2:154*. 
Lapish,  Hannah  Settle,  Vol.  2:525*. 
Larkin,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:289*. 
Larkin,  Joseph  James,  Vol.  4:448. 
Larsen,  Alfred  Levon,  Vol.  4:640. 
Larsen,  Charles  A.,  Vol.  4:640. 
Larsen,     Christian     (Newton     Ward), 

Vol.  1:406. 
Larsen,  Christian   (Logan),  Vol.  2:75. 
Larsen,  Christian  G.,  Vol.  1:523;  Vol. 

4:371*. 
Larsen,  Christian  J.  (Logan),  Vol.  1: 

423*. 
Larsen,  Christian  J.    (Glendale),  Vol. 

4:563. 
Larsen,  Hans  C,  Vol.  1:449*. 
Larsen,  Henry,  Vol.  3:138*. 
Larsen,  Holger  M.,  Vol.  4:328*. 
Larsen,  Jacob  Raphael,  Vol.  4:616. 
Larsen,  James,  Vol.  2:580*. 
Larsen,  James  Berkeley,  Vol.  4:617. 
Larsen,  John,  Vol.   1:441*. 
Larsen,  John  C,  Vol.  1:766. 


Larsen,  John  Parley,  Vol.  2:205. 
Larsen,  Joseph  Jorgen,  Vol.  4:461. 
Larsen,  Joseph  Young,  Vol.  2:460*. 
Larsen,  Lars,  Vol.  2:459*. 
Larsen,  Lars  C,  jun..  Vol.  4:563. 
Larsen,  Lauritz  E.,  Vol.  1:458. 
Larsen,  Lauritz  Orson,  Vol.  4:549. 
Larsen,  Ludvig,  Vol.  1:575. 
Larsen,  Marinus,  Vol.  3:138*. 
Larsen,  Niels,  Vol.  3:139*. 
Larsen,    Niels    Peter,   Vol.    4:534. 
Larsen,  Peter  Christian,  Vol.  3:140*. 
Larsen,  Sam  Henry,  Vol.  4:461. 
Larson,  Alof,  Vol.  3:141*. 
Larson,  Alof  Pratt,  Vol.  4:619. 
Larson,  Andrew  O.,  Vol.  4:484. 
Larson,  Ebba  P.,  Vol.  4:288. 
Larson,  John  A.,  Vol.  1:587. 
Larson,  John  Wm.,  Vol.  4:38,  103*. 
Larson,  Joseph  Arthur,  Vol.  4:481. 
Larson,  Lars  Peter,  Vol.  4:569. 
Larson,  Lehi,  Vol.  3:140*. 
Larson,  Mons  Peter,  Vol.  3:667. 
Larson,  Oluf,  Vol.  4:669. 
Larson,  Thurston,  Vol.  4:750. 
Lau,  Daniel  Frederick,  Vol.  3:142*. 
Lau,  Hyrum  Moroni,  Vol.  4:492. 
Lauchlin,  David  S.,  Vol.  4:751. 
Laurence,  William  R.,  Vol.  3:667. 
Lauritzen,  Jacob  M.,  Vol.  2:208*. 
Lautensock,  Peter,  Vol.  4:337,  645. 
Law,  Preston  Floyd,  Vol.  4:673. 
Law,  William,  Vol.  1:53. 
Lawson,  James,  Vol.  3:143*. 
Lay,   Hark,  Vol.  4:711. 
Layton,  Charles  M.,  Vol.  1:367*. 
Layton,  Christopher,  Vol.  1:363*. 
Layton,    Christopher   E.,   Vol.   4:566. 
Layton,  David  Edwin,  Vol.  3:141*. 
Layton,  Harry  Wilford,  Vol.  4:601. 
Layton,  Jesse  Monroe,  Vol.  4:601. 
Layton,  John  H.,  Vol.  3:668*. 
Layton,  Oscar  T.,  Vol.  2:662. 
Layton,  Richard  G.,  Vol.  1:560*. 
Layton,  Vernon  Cecil,  Vol.  4:751. 
Lazenby,  Moroni,  Vol.  4:552,  663. 
Leach,  James,  Vol.  4:509. 
Leak,  William,  Vol.  2:330*. 
Leak,  William  J.,  Vol.  2:331*. 
Leany,   Hyrum,   Vol.   2:193*. 
Leatham,  James,  Vol.  2:180*. 
Leatham,  Louis  Salisbury,  Vol.  4:751*. 
Leatham,  William,  Vol.  3:146*. 
Leavitt,   Edward   Jenkins,   Vol.   4:393. 
Leavitt,  Frank,  Vol.  4:393. 
Leavitt,  Horton  B.,  Vol.  3:669. 
LeBaron,  Geo.  W.,  Vol.  4:544. 
LeBaron,  Wm.  Johnson,  Vol.  4:525. 
Lechenberg,  Peter  Paul,  Vol.  3:147*. 
Lee,  Alfred  Dorris,  Vol.  4:649. 
Lee,  Earl  E.,  Vol.  4:555. 
Lee,  Ezekiel  (Dr),  Vol.  4:444. 
Lee,  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:587. 
Lee,  John,  Vol.  4:587. 
Lee,  John  Amasa,  Vol.  4:601. 


798 


INDEX 


Lee,  Joseph  W.,  Vol.  4:647. 
Lee,   LaFayette   Cox,  Vol.   4:452. 
Lee,  Samuel  Marion,  Vol.  3:441. 
Lee,  Severin  N.,  Vol.  3:669*.  Vol.  4: 

429. 
Lee,  Thomas  Wolkitt,  Vol.  3:147. 
Lee,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:670. 
Lee,  William  Orme,  Vol.  4:367. 
Lehi  Stake,  Vol.  4:505. 
Leigh,   Henry,  Vol.  3:441*. 
Leishman,   Phyllis   L.,   Vol.   4:289. 
Leithead,  James,  Vol.  1:540. 
Lemmon,  Hyrum,  Vol.  2:151*. 
Lemon,   Alexander  A.,  Vol.    1:435*. 
Lemon,  James  Wm.,  Vol.  4:752. 
Lemon,  John  Knox,  Vol.  2:662,  780*. 
Leonard,  David  Heber,  Vol.  4:461. 
Lesueur,  James  Warren,  Vol.  3:442*; 

Vol.  4:525. 
Lesueur,  John   T.,  Vol.    1:330*. 
Lethbridge   Stake,   Vol.   4:505-507. 
Lewis,  Ann  Llewellyn,  Vol.  2:350. 

Benjamin,  Vol.  3:670. 

Benjamin  M.,  Vol.   1:764*. 

Clair,  Vol.  3:148*. 

Geo.  Henry,  Vol.  4:433. 

Geo.  Warren,  Vol.  4:425. 

George  William,  Vol.  2:142. 

Henry,  Vol.  3:670*. 

Henry  A.,  Vol.  4:534. 

Jane  Amanda  S.,  Vol.  3:671. 
Phillip    Bessom,    Vol.    3:672; 

4:340. 

Rufus,  Vol.  2:349*. 

Samuel,  Vol.  4:752. 

Samuel  E.,  Vol.  1:557. 

Tarlton,  Vol.  3:673;  Vol.  4:611, 


Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 

Vol. 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 

711. 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 
Lewis 


Theodore  B.,  Vol.   3:148*. 

Wm.  Davis,  Vol.  4:631. 

William  H.,  Vol.  1:298*. 

Wm.  John,  Vol.  4:631. 
Liberty  Stake,  Vol.  4:507-511. 
Liddell,  Lawrence  T.,  Vol.  3:150*. 
Liddle,  Parley  H.,  Vol.  4:547. 
Liljenquist,  Harold  F.,  Vol.  4:489. 
Liljenquist,  Ola  N.,  Vol.  1:814*;  Vol. 

4:372. 
Lillywhite,  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:409. 
Lillywhite,  John  Philip,  Vol.  4:354*. 
Lind,  Niels,  Vol.  1:310. 
Lindquist,  Geo.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:436. 
Lindsay,  Bennett,  Vol.  4:660. 
Lindsay,  David   E.,  Vol.  2:45. 
Lindsay,  Edgar  Monroe,  Vol.  2:663. 
Lindsay,  James  Clarence,  Vol.  4:402. 
Lindsay,  John  Dunn,  Vol.  4:416. 
Lindsay,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:472*. 
Lindsay,  Joseph  Shanks,  Vol.  3:150*. 
Lindsay,  Philemon,  Vol.  2:267*. 
Lindsay,  Samuel  J.,  Vol.  4:444. 
Lindsay,  Warren  Parks,  Vol.  4:420. 
Linford,  James   H.,  jun.,  Vol.  2:72*. 
Linford,  James  Henry,  Vol.  2:90*. 
Linford,  James  Wesley,  Vol.  4:512. 


Linnell,  James   David,  Vol.   3:673. 
Lisonbee,  James  T.,  Vol.  2:140. 
Little,  Edwin  Sobieski,  Vol.  4:640. 
Little,  Feramorz,  Vol.  2:485*. 
Little,  Geo.  Alvin,  Vol.  4:566. 
Little,   Jesse   C,   Vol.    1:242;    Vol.   3: 

151*;  Vol.  4:331,  711. 
Little,    Rebecca    E.    M.,    Vol.    2:487*; 

Vol.  4:191. 
Livingston,  Abram,  Vol.  4:536. 
Livingston,  Charles  C,  Vol.  4:433. 
Lloyd,  Archie  E.,  Vol.  3:151*. 
Lloyd,  Chas.  Edw.,  Vol.  4:673. 
Lloyd,   Daniel  D.,  Vol.  4:398. 
Lloyd,  John  Lea,  Vol.  3:443. 
Lloyd,  Joseph  Francis,  Vol.  4:477. 
Lloyd,   Leah    F.   Ashton,   Vol.   4:289. 
Lofgren,  Nigls,  Vol.  2:343*. 
Lofgren,  Peter  Anders,  Vol.  4:601. 
Logan  Stake,  Vol.  4:511-514. 
Longden,  John,  Vol.  4:605. 
Loosle,  John   William,   Vol.   3:673. 
Loosle,   Reuben   Oddo,   Vol.   4:413. 
Lorentzen,    Godtfred,   Vol.   2:663*. 
Lorentzen,  Johan  P.,  Vol.  4:344. 
Los  Angeles  Stake,  Vol.  4:514-516. 
Losee,  Franklin  G.,  Vol.  4:711. 
Lost  River  Stake,  Vol.  4:516-519. 
Love,  David,  Vol.  4:597. 
Loveland,   Carlos   Heber,  Vol.   3:444*. 
Loveland,  Chauncey,  Vol.  4:711. 
Loveland,  David,  Vol.  4:640. 
Loveland,  Don  Chester,  Vol.  4:583. 
Loveland,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:583. 
Loveless,  James  Anderson,  Vol.  4:614. 
Loveless,   James    W.,   Vol.   4:658. 
Loveless,  Justin  A.,  Vol.  2:155*. 
Lovell,  John,  Vol.  3:152*. 
Lovesy,  Edith  Rossiter,  Vol.  4:263. 
Low,  Morris  David,  Vol.  4:402. 
Low,  Osborne,  Vol.  2:228*. 
Low,     Sylvester     (Alberta,     Canada), 

Vol.  2:17*. 
Low,   Sylvester    (Smithfield),   Vol.   4: 

413. 
Low,  Thomas  Scott  Budge,  Vol.  4:393. 
Lowe,  Alex.  H.,  Vol.  4:643. 
Lowe,  Moroni   W.,  Vol.  3:445*. 
Lowry,  James   Wm.,  Vol.  4:536. 
Lowry,  John,  Vol.  4:623. 
Lowry,  Marcellus  A.,  Vol.  4:394. 
Lowry,  William  B.,  Vol.  4:518. 
Loynd,  Joseph,   Vol.  4:504. 
Lucas,  Hyrum  John,  Vol.  4:471. 
Lucherine,  Henry,  Vol.  4:420. 
Ludvigsen,   Frederik,   Vol.   2:558*. 
Ludvigson,  Eric,  Vol.  4:623. 
Lund,  Anthon  H.,  Vol.  1:161*;  Vol.  3: 

753*;   Vol.   4:242,   315*,   372*,  683*. 
Lund,    August    William,    Vol.    3:754; 

Vol.  4:315*,  683. 
Lund,  Christian  N.,  Vol.  1:339*;  Vol. 

4:372*. 
Lund,  Henry  C,  Vol.  2:780*;  Vol.  4: 

242. 


INDEX 


799 


Lund,  Hyrum  Elmer,  Vol.  4:560. 
Lund,  Julia  A.  F.,  Vol.  4:191. 
Lund,  Louis  P.,  Vol.  1:512*. 
Lundberg,   Benjamin,  Vol.   4:521. 
Lundberg,   Frederick,   Vol.   3:445*. 
Lundell,  Henry  G.,  Vol.  4:544. 
Lundgren,   Arthur   C,   Vol.   4:626. 
Lundgren,  Waldemar  O.,  Vol.  3:446*. 
Lundquist,  Jos.  Lavern,  Vol.  4:587. 
Lunt,  Clarence  L.,  Vol.  4:500. 
Lunt,  Henry,  Vol.  3:446*. 
Lunt,  Henry  Hunter,  Vol.  3:448*. 
Lunt,   Henry   Whittaker,   Vol.   3:447*. 
Lunt,  John  E.,  Vol.  4:497. 
Lybbert,  Christian  F.  B.,  Vol.  1:479*. 
Lyman,   Albert   Robison,.  Vol.   4:608. 
Lyman,   Amasa    M.,   Vol.   1:96*;    Vol. 

4:316*,  322,  712. 
Lyman,  Amy  Brown,  Vol.  2:664*;  Vol. 

4:191*. 
Lyman,  Edward  Leo,  jun..  Vol.  4:452. 
Lyman,  Francis  Marion,  Vol.  1:136*; 

Vol.  3:755;  Vol.  4:242,  316*. 
Lyman,   Frederick   R.,   Vol.   3:153*. 
Lyman,   Geo.   Richard,   Vol.  4:655. 
Lyman,  Platte  De  Alton,  Vol.  3:153*; 

Vol.  4:316*. 
Lyman,  Richard  R.,  Vol.  3:756*;  Vol. 

4:242. 
Lyman  Stake,  Vol.  4:519. 
Lyman,   Walter   Clisbee,   Vol.   3:154*; 

Vol.  4:362. 
Lyman,  Wm.  Home,  Vol.  4:573. 
Lyman,  Willis  Jay,  Vol.  4:452. 
Lyon,  David  Cairns,  Vol.  4:668. 
Lyon,  David  Ross,  Vol.  2:540. 
Lyon,  John  Jos.,  Vol.  4:617. 
Lyon,  Warren  H.,  Vol.  4:38*,  379*. 
Lyons,   William   Orvil,   Vol.   3:155*. 
Lytle,  John,  Vol.  4:464. 


M 


Mabey,  Albert,  jun..  Vol.  4:658. 
Mabey,  Charles  R.,  Vol.  4:154*,  242. 
MacDonald,    Wallace   Aird,   jun..   Vol. 

4:152*. 
Mace,  John,  Vol.  3:674. 
Macfarlane,  Andrew  N.,  Vol.   1:681*. 
Macfarlane,  Isaac   C,  Vol.  3:448*. 
Mackay,  John   Calder,  Vol.  2:104. 
Madsen,  Adolph,  Vol.  4:429. 
Madsen,  Axel  A.,  Vol.  4:242*. 
Madsen,  Christian  A.,  Vol.  1:816*. 
Madsen,  Ellen  Nielsen,  Vol.  2:781*. 
Madsen,  Emelia  D.,  Vol.  4:192. 
Madsen,   Helena   D.,  Vol.   4:193. 
Madsen,  Lars  Peter,  Vol.  2:781*. 
Madsen,  Niels,  Vol.  2:665*. 
Madsen,  Niels  Peter,  Vol.  4:550. 
Madsen,   Peter   (Fort   Ephraim),   Vol. 

2:780*. 
Madsen,   Peter    (Provo),   Vol.   4:614. 
Madsen,  Peter  F.,  Vol.  2:64*. 
Madsen,  Spencer,  Vol.  4:614. 


Maeser,  Karl  G.,  Vol.   1:707*;  Vol    4: 

322    387 
Maeser,  Lillian  L.,  Vol.  4:289. 
Magleby,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:665*. 
Magleby,  John  E.,  Vol.  4:361*,  626. 
Magleby,   Orson,   Vol.   3:155*. 
Maiben,   John   B.,   Vol.    1:522*. 
Major,  Frederick  R.,  Vol.  4:536. 
Major,  William  Warner,  Vol.  3:674. 
Malad  Stake,  Vol.  4:519-523. 
Malin,  Elijah,  jun..  Vol.  3:674. 
Malin,  John  McGuckin,  Vol.  2:666. 
Mallory,  Warren  James,  Vol.   4:617. 
Malta   Mission,  Vol.  4:346-347. 
Mangum,   Corel   Henry,   Vol.  4:475. 
Mangum,  Jennie  Knight,  Vol.  4:263. 
Mann,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  1:467. 
Manning,  Arthur,  Vol.  3:675. 
Manning,  David  Henry,  Vol.  4:649. 
Manning,  Margaret  R.  W.,  Vol.  3:449*. 
Manning,  Wm.  Hart,  Vol.  4:679. 
Manning,   William   H.,   Vol.  3:450*. 
Mansfield,  Matthew  W.,  Vol.   1:527. 
Mantle,  John  Willard,  Vol.  4:752. 
Marble,  Daniel  Burbank,  Vol.  4:406. 
Marble,  Daniel  Milton,  Vol.  4:406. 
Marble,  Samuel  Harvey,  Vol.  4:712. 
Marchant,  Abraham,  jun..  Vol.  4:631. 
Marchant,  Abraham  F.,  Vol.  4:631. 
Marchant,   Ernest  W.,   Vol.   4:416. 
Marchant,  Franklin  W.,  Vol.  2:233*. 
Marcroft,    Charlotte,    Vol.    2:421*. 
Marcroft,  John,  Vol.  2:  421*. 
Margetts,  Charles  P.,  Vol.  2:781*. 
Margetts,  Geo.  B.,  Vol.  4:727. 
Margetts,  Philip,  Vol.  4:104*. 
Maricopa  Stake,  Vol.  4:523-527. 
Markham,    Stephen,   Vol.   3:676;    Vol. 

4:712. 
Markham,  Stephen  D.,  Vol.  4:569. 
Markham,  Wm.  D.  C,  Vol.  4:569. 
Marks,  William,  Vol.  1:283. 
Marriott,  Moroni  Stewart,  Vol.  4:555. 
Marsden,  Lucius  Nelson,  Vol.  3:450. 
Marsden,  Lucius   N.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:573. 
Marsh,  Albert,  Vol.  4:39. 
Marsh,  Thomas  B.,  Vol.  1:74. 
Marshall,  George,  Vol.  2:40*. 
Marshall,  Geo.,  jun..  Vol.  4:410. 
Marshall,  Wm.  Calvin,  Vol.  4:653. 
Martin,   James,   Vol.    2:250*. 
Martin,  James,  jun.,  Vol.  4:555. 
Martin,  John  S.,  Vol.  4:441. 
Martin,  Jos.  Moroni,  Vol.  4:670. 
Martin,  Moses  S.,  Vol.  4:441. 
Martin,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:379. 
Martindale,    Alvin,   Vol.   4:484. 
Martineau,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:126. 
Martineau,  James  H.,  Vol.  3:156*. 
Martineau,    Lyman    R.,    Vol.    3:677*; 

Vol.  4:243. 
Martinsen,  Charles,  Vol.  3:678*. 
Mason,  Ambrose  Todd,  Vol.  2:295*. 
Mather,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:43*. 
Mathews,  Hazen  Poulsen,  Vol.  4:512. 


800 


INDEX 


Matheson,  Alexander  G.,  Vol.  2:188*. 
Matheson,  John   B.,   Vol.   4:153*. 
Mathias,  John  B.,  Vol.  4:310. 
Matthews,  Daniel  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:601. 
Matthews,  David  Henry,  Vol.  4:601. 
Matthews,  Joseph,   Vol.   4:713. 
Matthews,   Percy   George,  Vol.   4:40*. 
Matthews,   Samuel,  Vol.   3:159*. 
Matson,  Peter,  Vol.   1:370*. 
Mattson,  Carl  Albert,  Vol.  4:552. 
Mattson,  Peter,  Vol.  4:383. 
Maughan,  Charles  N.,  Vol.  3:451*. 
Maughan,   Edw.   Leroy,  Vol.   4:467. 
Maughan,  Hyrum,  Vol.  3:679. 
Maughan,  John,  Vol.   1:445*. 
Maughan,  Peter,  Vol.   1:758*. 
Maughan,  Willard  W.,  Vol.  4:436. 
Maughan,  William  H.,  Vol.   1:437. 
Mauss,  Michael,  Vol.  4:444. 
Maw,  Henry  Thomas,  Vol.  4:555. 
Maw,  Herbert  B.,  Vol.  4:216*,  243. 
Maw,  Wilmer  John,  Vol.  4:555. 
Mawson,  William  Oliver,  Vol.  2:465. 
Maxfield,  Hiett  E.,  Vol.  4:452. 
Maxwell,  Arthur,  jun..  Vol.  4:632. 
Maxwell,  James,  Vol.   1:687. 
Maxwell,  James  A.,  Vol.  4:632. 
Maxwell,  Ralph  Wallace,  Vol.  4:632. 
Maxwell,  Wm.  Baley,  Vol.  4:753. 
May,  Fredrick  John,  Vol.  4:307. 
May,  James  Ira,  Vol.  4:640. 
May,  Joseph  Eugene,  Vol.  4:577. 
May,  Richard  C,  Vol.  4:416,  530. 
Maycock,  Geo.  Ray,  Vol.  4:504. 
Maycock,  Philip  S.,  Vol.  4:243,  391. 
Maycock,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:509. 
Maynes,  Emily  Keep,  Vol.  3:454*. 
Maynes,  John  Alex.,  Vol.  3:452*. 
Maynes,  Joseph  Watson,  Vol.  3:454*. 
Maynes,   Selina  Jane,  Vol.  3:453*. 
McAdam,  John  Wright,  Vol.  4:658. 
McAllister,    Duncan    M.,   Vol.    1:651*; 

Vol.  4:682. 
McAUister,  Geo.  Stanley,  Vol.  4:464. 
McAlUster,  John  D.  T.,  Vol.  1:334*. 
McAllister,  Richard  S.,  Vol.  4:503. 
McArthur,  James,  Vol.  4:594. 
Mc Arthur,  Daniel  D.,  Vol.  1:336*. 
McArthur,  Wilford  W.,  Vol.  4:594. 
McBride,  Chas.  Reuben,  Vol.  4:647. 
McBride,  Elam  Wells,  Vol.  4:441. 
McBride,  George,  Vol.  3:679. 
McBride,  James  A.,  jun..  Vol.  4:602. 
McBride,  Loren   Dyphus,  Vol.  3:159*. 
McBride,  Reuben,  Vol.  4:690. 
McBride,  Reuben  Marion,  Vol.  4:655. 
McBride,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:680. 
McCann,  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  4:398. 
McCardell,  James,  Vol.  4:484. 
McCarrey,  James  Lewis,  Vol.  4:413. 
McClellan,  Charles  E.,  Vol.  4:500. 
McClellan,  John  J.,  Vol.  1:747*. 
McCrary,  John  M.,  Vol.  4:521. 
McCuUough,   Leonard  J.,  Vol.  4:377. 
McCullough,  Thos.  J.,  Vol.  4:396. 


McCullough,  William  A.,  Vol.  1:496*. 
McCune,  Elizabeth  A.  C,  Vol.  2:667*; 

Vol.  4:192,  263. 
McCune,  Geo.  W.,  Vol.  4:331. 
McCune,  Henry  Fred,  Vol.  3:160. 
McCune,  Matthew,  Vol.  3:161. 
McDonald,  Alexander  F.,  Vol.  1:557*. 
McDonald,  David  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:386. 
McDonald,  John,  Vol.  2:11. 
McDonald,  Joseph  C,  Vol.  4:661. 
McEntire,  Wm.  F.,  Vol.  4:556. 
McEntire,  William  Rawson,  Vol.  4:39. 
McEwan,    Daniel    Dean,   Vol.   2:667*. 
McFarland,  Archibald,  Vol.  4:556. 
McFarland,    Robert,   Vol.   4:556. 
McFarlane,  Horace  James,  Vol.  4:103. 
McFarlane,  Jos.   Clark,  Vol.   4:542. 
McGhie,  Robert  L.,  Vol.  2:669*. 
McGrath,  James   Vernon,   Vol.   4:602. 
McGregor,    Daniel   Wells,   Vol.    4:398. 
McGregor,  Joseph  F.,  Vol.  3:680*. 
McGregor,  William  C.  (Parowan),  Vol. 

3:681*. 
McGregor,    William    C.    (of    Bannock 

Stake),  Vol.  3:161*. 
McGuire,  Patrick  Henry,  Vol.  2:670*. 
Mcintosh,  Abraham   E.,  Vol.  2:581. 
Mcintosh,  William,  Vol.  4:647. 
McKay,  Angus,   Vol.   2:339*. 
McKay,  David,  Vol.  4:560. 
McKay,    David    Oman,    Vol.    3:760*; 

Vol.  4:316*. 
McKay,  James  Gunn,  Vol.  4:243. 
McKay,   Thomas   Evans,  Vol.   3:682*; 

Vol.  4:387. 
McKean,  Mary  Page  G.,  Vol.  2:377*. 
McKean,  Theodore,  Vol.  2:374*. 
McKean,  Theodore,  jun..  Vol.  2:409*. 
McKee,  Joseph  Allen,  Vol.  2:671*. 
McKell,  Arthur  Thos.,  Vol.  4:569. 
McKell,   Robt.   Wilson,   Vol.   4:569*. 
McKenzie,  David,  Vol.  2:670*. 
McKibben,  Robert  G.,  Vol.  4:433. 
McKinnon,  Archibald,  Vol.  1:332. 
McKinnon,  Peter,  Vol.  1:470*. 
McKnight,  James,  Vol.  4:410. 
McLachlan,  William,  Vol.  1:611*. 
McLean,  David  K.  M.,  Vol.  4:492. 
McLelland,  Edward  M.,  Vol.  3:162*. 
McLelland,   Sarah    M.,   Vol.  4:192. 
McLelland,  Thomas,  Vol.   2:431*. 
McLellin,  William  E.,  Vol.  1:82. 
McMaster,  John   B.,  Vol.  2:64*. 
McMillan,  David,  Vol.  4:670. 
McMillen,  William,  Vol.  2:201*. 
McMullen,    Bryant    Ross,    Vol.    2:234; 

Vol.  4:506. 
McMullin,  Albert  Eals,  Vol.  4:438. 
McMuUin,   Albert  O.,  Vol.  2:782. 
McMullin,  Brigham  Y.,  Vol.  3:455*. 
McMullin,   Henry   Luflin,  Vol.  3:162*. 
McMullin,  Ira  Edward,  Vol.  4:594. 
McMullin,  Ira   Spaulding,   Vol.   3:455. 
McMurrin,    Joseph    W.,    Vol.    1:216*; 
Vol.  4:243,  323*. 


INDEX 


801 


McNeil,  James  Reed,  Vol.  4:597. 
McNeil,  John,  Vol.  1:504*. 
McNeil,  Thos.   Wm.,  Vol.  4:632. 
McNiven,  James  Scott,  Vol.  4:417. 
McPhie,  John  Robertson,  Vol.  4:670. 
McPhie,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  4:576. 
McQuarrie,  John  G.,  Vol.  4:331. 
McQuarrie,  Robert,  Vol.  2:16. 
McRae,  Alexander,  Vol.  1:620. 
McRae,  Daniel,  Vol.  1:567*. 
McRae,  Joseph  A.,  Vol.  4:325. 
McRae,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  4:391. 
Mead,  Orlando  Fish,  Vol.  4:753. 
Mecham,  Erastus   D.,  Vol.  4:448. 
Mecham,  Joseph  L.,  sen..  Vol.  2:149*; 

Vol.  4:539. 
Mecham,  Jos.  Lyman,  jun..  Vol.  4:539. 
Mecham,  Leonidas  A.,  Vol.  3:163. 
Mecham,  Leonidas  S.,  Vol.  2:267*. 
Mecham,  Moroni,  Vol.  4:617. 
Mecham,  Moses  M.,  Vol.  2:240. 
Mecham,  Wm.   Henry,  Vol.  4:448. 
Meeks,  Heber  Jesse,  Vol.  2:132*;  Vol. 

3:163. 
Meeks,  James  Orson,  Vol.  4:475. 
Meeks,  Robt.  Arthur,  Vol.  4:663. 
Meeks,   WilHam,   Vol.   3:456*. 
Meikle,  Robert  Gilbert,  Vol.  4:640. 
Mellor,  Archie  Myron,  Vol.  3:456. 
Mellor,  Effie  Howe,  Vol.  4:289. 
Mellor,  James,  jun..  Vol.   2:782*. 
Memmott,  Thomas,  Vol.   1:531. 
Mendenhall,  James  M.,  Vol.  4:530. 
Mendenhall,   William   H.,   Vol.    1:769; 

Vol.  3:163*. 
Mercer,  Jared  Alma,  Vol.  4:441. 
Merkley,    Christopher    Amos,    Vol.    4: 

420,  617. 
Merkley,  Nathaniel  W.,  Vol.  4:513. 
Merkley,  Ray  Edgar,  Vol.  4:420. 
Merrill,  Adrian  A.,  Vol.  4:650. 
Merrill,  Albert,  Vol.  2:390*. 
Merrill,  Alberto  John,  Vol.  3:164*. 

Merrill,  Alma,  Vol.  1:400*. 

Merrill,  Amos  Newlove,  Vol.  2:783*. 

Merrill,  Amy  Lyman,  Vol.  4:290. 

Merrill,  Austin  Taylor,  Vol.  4:563. 

Merrill,  Bathsheba  M.,  Vol.  2:392. 

Merrill,  Clarence,  Vol.  2:391*. 

Merrill,   Fred,  Vol.  4:607. 

Merrill,  Harrison  R.,  Vol.  4:243,  564. 

Merrill,  Heber  Kimball,  Vol.  2:74. 

Merrill,  John  Smith,  Vol.  4:602. 

Merrill,  Joseph   F.,  Vol.    1:784*;   Vol. 
4:244. 

Merrill,  Jos.  Harris,  Vol.  4:367. 

Merrill,  Katie  E.  Hale,  Vol.  3:683. 

Merrill,  Leslie  Vinton,  Vol.  4:471. 

Merrill,  Lewis  A.,  Vol.  4:509. 

Merrill,  Lorin  A.,  Vol.  4:513. 

Merrill,  Marriner  W.,  Vol.  1:156*;  Vol. 
3:764. 

Merrill,  Morgan  Henry,  Vol.  4:602. 

Merrill,   Olonzo   D.,  Vol.  4:390. 

Merrill,  Orrin  Jackson,  Vol.  4:467. 

Vol.  IV,  No.  51 


Merrill,    Orrin    Preston,    Vol.    4:580. 
Merrill,  Philemon  C,  Vol.  4:602,  753. 
Merrill    (Thompson),  Phoebe  L.,  Vol. 

4:754. 
Merrill,   Porter   Wm.,  Vol.  4:653. 
Merrill,  Thomas   H.,  Vol.   1:404*. 
Merrill,  Wm.  Porter,  Vol.  4:455. 
Merz,  Adolph,  Vol.  2:571*. 
Meservy,  Joseph  R.,  Vol.  2:102,  809*. 
Meservy,   Margaret  O.,   Vol.   2:809*. 
Meservy,  Oliver  K.,  Vol.  2:103,  809*; 

Vol.  3:164. 
Meservy,  Mrs.  O.  K.,  Vol.  2:809*. 
Mets,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:354. 
Mets,  Timothy,  Vol.  4:355*. 
Mexican    Mission,    Vol.    4:347-349. 
Michelsen,  Fred  M.,  Vol.  4:509. 
Michie,  Wm.  Geo.,  Vol.  4:455. 
Mickelsen,   Canute  H.,  Vol.  4:640. 
Mickelsen,  Henry  N.,  Vol.  4:518. 
Mickelson,  James  Michael,  Vol.  4:455. 
Mickelson,  Michael,  Vol.  4:399. 
Middle  States  Mission,  Vol.  4:349. 
Middleton,   Charles    F.,   Vol.    1:460. 
Middleton,    George    W.,    Vol.    2:481*; 

Vol.  4:727. 
Midgley,  Jemima  R.  H.,  Vol.  2:491*. 
Midgley,  Joshua,  Vol.  2:490*. 
Miles,   Daniel  S.,  Vol.   1:192. 
Miles,  Edwin  R.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:413. 
Miles,   Frankhn   Godbe,  Vol.  4:594. 
Miles,  Gertrude   Griffiths,  Vol.  4:754. 
Miles,  Jeddie  Leroy,  Vol.  4:564. 
Miles,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:536*;  Vol.  4:754. 
Miles,  Wm.  Hart,  Vol.  4:331. 
Miles,   Zaidie   Walker,   Vol.  4:290. 
Millard  Stake,  Vol.  4:527-529. 
Miller,  Abiah  W.,  Vol.  4:506. 
Miller,  Arnold  D.,  Vol.  4:310,  674. 
Miller,  Arnold  D.,  jun..  Vol.  3:457*. 
Miller,  Arnold  David,  Vol.  4:549. 
Miller,  Austin   Porter,  Vol.  4:479. 
Miller,  Charles  E.,  Vol.  2:314*. 
Miller,  Christian  Marius,  Vol.  4:461. 
Miller,  Daniel  G.,  Vol.  2:101. 
Miller,  Daniel  Morgan,  Vol.  4:755. 

Miller,  Daniel  T.,  Vol.  4:377. 

Miller,  Eleazer,  Vol.  2:672*. 

Miller,  Geo.  Campbell,  Vol.  4:628. 

Miller,  Henry  William,  Vol.  3:165;  Vol. 
4:345. 

Miller,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:87*. 

Miller,  James  Nathan,  Vol.  4:438. 

Miller,    James    R.,    Vol.    1:563. 

Miller,  John  Henry,  Vol.  4:619. 

Miller,  John  W.,  Vol.  4:452. 

Miller,  Lewis  Edgar,  Vol.,  3:683. 

Miller,   Margaret  N.,  Vol.   2:673*. 

Miller,  Miles,  Vol.  4:755. 

Miller,  Orrin  P.,  Vol.  1:307*;  Vol.  3: 
764. 

Miller,  Reuben,  Vol.  3:166*. 

Miller,  Reuben  G.,  Vol.   1:524,  821*. 

Miller,  Uriah  G.,  Vol.  1:568*. 

December   19,   1936 


802 


INDEX 


Miller,  William  (Utah  Stake),  Vol.  1: 

481*. 
Miller,  William   (Hunter  Ward),  Vol. 

2:460*. 
Miller,    William    (Coalville),    Vol.    2: 

672-. 
Miller,  Wm.  Archibald,  Vol.  4:410. 
Miller,  William  Henry,  Vol.  3:166*. 
Mills,   Henry   Geo.,   Vol.  4:461. 
Mills,  George,  Vol.  4:713. 
Milne,  Annie   Spencer,   Vol.  4:290. 
Milne,  Chas.  L.  M.,  Vol.  4:458. 
Mineer,   Frank   Edgar,  Vol.  4:532. 
Miner,  Laura  M.  Hyde,  Vol.  4:193. 
Minidoka  Stake,  Vol.  4:529-531. 
Minson,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:30*. 
Miskin,  James  Richard,  Vol.  2:53*. 
Mitchell,    Benjamin    T.,    Vol.    2:369*. 
Mitchell,  Daniel  J.,  Vol.  4:632. 
Mitchell,  Frederick  A.   H.  F.,  Vol.  4: 

340. 
Mitchell,  Frederick  E.,  Vol.  3:457;  Vol. 

4:666. 
Mitchell,  Jos.  Clayton,  Vol.  4:573. 
Mitchell,   Walter  C,  Vol.  3:459*. 
Mitchell,  Wm.  Cook,  Vol.  3:458*. 
Mitton,   Samuel   Bailey,  Vol.   3:167*. 
Moapa  Stake,  Vol.  4:531-533. 
Moench,  Louis  F.,  Vol.  2:244*. 
Moffett,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:673. 
Moffitt,  Andrew  J.,  Vol.  4:624. 
Moffitt,  John  Clifton,  Vol.  4:455. 
Molen,  Simpson  M.,  Vol.  1:408*;  Vol. 

4:340*. 
Money,  Albert  Thurber,  Vol.  2:161*. 
Monson,  Alma  H.,  Vol.  4:467. 
Monson,  Hiram,  Vol.  3:168*. 
Monson,  John  F.,  Vol.  4:420. 
Monson,  Peter,  Vol.  3:459*. 
Monson,    Walter    Peter,    Vol.    2:175*; 

Vol.   4:332*. 
Monroe,  Theodore  M.,  Vol.  4:580. 
Montana  Mission,  Vol.  4:349. 
Monteirth,  Alvin  M.,  Vol.  2:198. 
Montgomery,  Jos.  Albert,  Vol.  4:583. 
Montpelier  Stake,  Vol.  4:533-535. 
Moody,  Ella  Adelia,  Vol.  3:684. 
Moody,  Francis  Winfred,  Vol.  2:268*. 
Moody,  Milton,  Vol.  4:452. 
Mcody,  Wm.  A.,  Vol.  2:195;  Vol.  4:367. 
Moon,   Heber,  Vol.  4:455. 
Moon,  Henry,  Vol.  4:509. 
Moore,  Calvin  White,  Vol.  4:461. 
Moore,  Clarence  E.,  Vol.  4:587. 
Moore,  John,  Vol.  1:797;  Vol.  2:162*. 
Moore,  Joseph  Weber,  Vol.  3:460*. 
Morgan,  Frederick  Willard,  Vol.  4:640. 
Morgan,  John,  Vol.  1:204*;  Vol.  4:381. 
Morgan,  Joseph  R.,  Vol.  1:639. 
Morgan,  Joshua  B.,  Vol.  4:587. 
Morgan,  Nicholas  G.,  Vol.  4:244. 
Morgan,  Ralph  David,  Vol.  4:569. 
Morgan,   Thomas,   Vol.    1:763. 
Morgan,  William  R.,  Vol.  3:168*. 
Morgan  Stake,  Vol.  4:537-541. 


Morley,  Geo.  F.,  Vol.  4:536. 
Morley,  Isaac,  Vol.  1:235;  Vol.  2:784*. 
Moroni  Stake,  Vol.  4:535-537. 
Morrell,  Joseph,  Vol.   1:407*. 
Morrell,  William  H.,  Vol.  3:461*. 
Morrill,  Horace,  Vol.  4:653. 
Morrill,  Horace  Leroy,  Vol.  4:653. 
Morrill,  John,  Vol.  3:169*. 
Morris,  Arthur  Chas.,  Vol.  4:458. 
Morris,  Clarence,  Vol.  4:542. 
Morris,  Elias,  Vol.   1:636*. 
Morris,  Emma  Ramsay,  Vol.  4:291. 
Morris,  George  Edwin,  Vol.  3:684. 
Morris,   George   Quayle,   Vol.   2:367*; 

Vol.  4:244*. 
Morris,  Hiram  Bowles,  Vol.  3:462*. 
Morris,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  3:683*. 
Morris,  Nephi  L.,  Vol.  1:639*;  Vol.  4: 

245,  727. 
Morris,  Parley  M.,  Vol.  4:580. 
Morris,  Richard  P.,  Vol.  4:727. 
Morris,  Richard  V.,  Vol.  1:675*. 
Morris,   Robert,  Vol.   1:621. 
Morrison,  John  Alfred,  Vol.  3:464. 
Morrison,  John  Irvin,  Vol.  4:674. 
Mortensen,  Ammon  Ernst,  Vol.  4:610. 
Mortensen,  Andrew  D.,  Vol.  4:564. 
Mortensen,  Christian,  Vol.  2:324*. 
Mortensen,  Hans  Jorgen,  Vol.  3:464*. 
Mortensen,  Jesse  L.,  Vol.  4:413,  484. 
Mortensen,  Johan  P.,  Vol.  2:673*. 
Mortensen,  Lars,  Vol.  3:801*. 
Mortensen,  Morten  C,  Vol.  1:397*. 
Mortensen,  Niels  C,  Vol.  2:340. 
Morton,  William  A.,  Vol.  4:684. 
Moses,  Martin,  Vol.  4:647. 
Moss,  Alexander,  Vol.  4:647. 
Moss,  Daniel,  Vol.  3:171*. 
Moss,  David,  Vol.  4:755. 
Moss,  Emma  A.,  Vol.  3:170*. 
Moss,  Hyrum  Thomas,  Vol.  4:587. 
Moss,   James    Edw.,   Vol.   4:444. 
Moss,  John,  Vol.  3:169*. 
Moss,  Melvina  Rushton,  Vol.  3:171*. 
Moss,  Rebecca  Wood,  Vol.  3:170*. 
Moss,  William,  Vol.  4:621. 
Moss,  Wm.  F.,  Vol.  4:647. 
Moulton,  Thomas  Alma,  Vol.  4:640. 
Mouritzen,  Mouritz,  Vol.  1:424. 
Mount  Ogden  Stake,  Vol.  4:541-543. 
Mousley,  Lewis  H.,  Vol.  2:107. 
Mowrey,  Harley,  Vol.  4:755. 
Moyes,  David  Gown,  Vol.  4:650. 
Moyes,  Ralph  E.,  Vol.  4:756. 
Moyle,  Henry,  Vol.  2:674. 
Moyle,  Henry  D.,  Vol.  4:445,  756. 
Moyle,  James,  Vol.  1:776*. 
Moyle,  James  H.,  Vol.  1:783*;  Vol.  4: 

332* 
Muir,  ban.  Vol.  2:88. 
Muir,  David  M.,  Vol.  3:684. 
Muir,  Geo.  Henry,  Vol.  4:492. 
Muir,  James  A.,  Vol.  1:579. 
Muir,  Wm.  S.  (Woodruff  Stake),  Vol. 

2:256. 


INDEX 


803 


Muir,    Wm.    S.    (Mormon    Battalion), 

Vol.  4:756. 
Muller,  Jacob,  Vol.  3:172*. 
Mulliner,  Joseph  S.,  sen.,  Vol.  4:495. 
Mumford,  Elizabeth  M.,  Vol.  2:400*. 
Mumford,  George,  Vol.  2:37. 
Mumford,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:399. 
Munns,  Charles,  Vol.  3:465*. 
Murdock,  Brigham,  Vol.  3:172*. 
Murdock,  David  L.,  Vol.  2:522*. 
Murdock,  Gideon  A.,  Vol.  2:39. 
Murdock,  Gideon  M.,  Vol.  2:400-. 
Murdock,   John,   Vol.   2:362*;    Vol.   4: 

307*. 
Murdock,  John  M.    (Wasatch   Stake), 

Vol.  2:12. 
Murdock,  John  M.  (Beaver  Stake),  Vol. 

2  '38* 
Murdock,  John  R.,  Vol.  1:304*. 
Murdock,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:173. 
Murdock,  Joseph  R.,  Vol.  1:361*;  Vol. 

3:174*. 
Murdock,  Joseph  S.,  Vol.  3:173*. 
Murdock,  Keith,  Vol.  4:567. 
Murdock,  Nymphas  C,  Vol.  3:174*. 
Murdock,  Reuben  Chase,  Vol.  4:410. 
Murdock,  Royal  Joseph,  Vol.  4:658. 
Murdock,  Sally  Stacey,  Vol.  3:173*. 
Murdock,  Thos.  Todd,  Vol.  4:674. 
Murphy,  Castle  Henry,  Vol.  4:666. 
Murphy,  Emanuel  B.,  Vol.  4:456. 
Murray,  Carlos,  Vol.  4:713. 
Murray,  David,  Vol.  4:489. 
Musser,  Amos  Milton,  Vol.  1:381*;  Vol. 

3:765;  Vol.  4:684*. 
Musser,  Don  C.  W.,  Vol.  4:391. 
Musser,  Fred.  S.,  Vol.  4:456,  590. 
Myers,  Carl  Peter,  Vol.  2:459*. 
Myers,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:319*. 
Myers,  Wilford  Jacob,  Vol.  4:668. 
Myler,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:485. 
Myrup,  Lars  C.  N.,  Vol.  2:224*. 

N 

Naegle,    George    Conrad,    Vol.    1:562, 

822*;    Vol.  4:387,  757. 
Naegle,  Manuel  Conrad,  Vol.  4:413. 
Naisbitt,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  3:175*. 
Nalder,  Daniel  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:605. 
Nalder,  Francis  Henry,  Vol.  3:466*. 
Nalder,  William  N.,  Vol.   2:91. 
Nash,  Isaac  B.,   Vol.   2:178*;   Vol.   3: 

466*. 
Nations,  Thos.  Jefferson,  Vol.  4:602. 
Naylor,  Thos.  Clarence,  Vol.  4:602. 
Naylor,  William,  Vol.  4:727. 
Neal,  Mary  Malissa,  Vol.  2:784*. 
Nebeker,  Ammon,  Vol.  2:152*. 
Nebeker,  Ann,  Vol.  4:291*. 
Nebeker,  Ashton,  Vol.  3:180*. 
Nebeker,  Delia  Lane,  Vol.  2:34*. 
Nebeker,  Emeline  Free  Young,  Vol.  4: 

193. 
Nebeker,  Geo.,  Vol.  1:682;  Vol.  4:340. 
Nebeker,  Ira,  Vol.  2:33*. 


Nebeker,  John,   Vol.   3:176*.  468. 
Nebeker,  John  L.,  Vol.  1:683;  Vol.  2: 

785*. 
Nebeker,  Lurena  F.,  Vol.  3:178*. 
Nebeker,  Mary  W.,  Vol.  3:179*. 
Nebeker,  Phebe  S.  T.,  Vol.  3:182*. 
Nebeker,  Sarah  I.  McK.,  Vol.  3:181*. 
Nebeker,  William  Perry,  Vol.  3:180*; 

Vol.  4:387. 
Nebo  Stake,  Vol.  4:543-546. 
Neddo,  Isaac  James,  Vol.  4:583. 
Needham,  Alice  W.,  Vol.  2:419. 
Needham,  James,  Vol.  2:419*. 
Needham,  John,  Vol.   1:414*. 
Needham,  Martha  B.,  Vol.  2:420. 
Neeley,  Enos  Austin,  Vol.  4:641, 
Neeley,  William,  Vol.  4:429. 
Neff,  Amos  Herr,  Vol.  2:103*. 
Neff,  Ann  Eliza  B.,  Vol.  3:468*. 
Neff,  Eugene  J.,  Vol.  4:340,  479. 
Neff,  John,  Vol.  2:785*. 
Neff,  John,  jun.,  Vol.  2:787. 
Neff,  Mary  B.,  Vol.  2:786*. 
Nelson,  August  M.,  Vol.  4:41. 
Nelson,  Carl  Magnus,  Vol.  3:183*. 
Nelson,  Christian  T.,  Vol.  3:469*. 
Nelson,  Daniel  Morgan,  Vol.  3:183*. 
Nelson,  David,  Vol.  4:425. 
Nelson,  David  Anthony,  Vol.  4:641. 
Nelson,  David  Geo.,  Vol.  4:448. 
Nelson,  Ephraim,  Vol.  4:536. 
Nelson,  Gamaliel  V.,  Vol.  4:641. 
Nelson,  Geo.  Glen,  Vol.  4:413. 
Nelson,  Heber  C,  Vol.  4:425. 
Nelson,  Hyrum  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:461. 
Nelson,  Irvin  Theo.,  Vol.  4:445,  757. 
Nelson,  J.  Edwin,  Vol.  4:245. 
Nelson,  James,  jun.,  Vol.  4:406. 
Nelson,  John  A.,  jun..  Vol.  4:367. 
Nelson,  John  E.,  Vol.  3:685. 
Nelson,  John  S.,  see  Nielsen. 
Nelson,  Joseph  (Bus.  College),  Vol    1: 

784*. 
Nelson,  Joseph  (Provo),  Vol.  4:658. 
Nelson,  Joseph  Everet,  Vol.  4:632. 
Nelson,  Joseph  G.,  Vol.  2:172,  173*. 
Nelson,  Lars  L.,  Vol.  4:658. 
Nelson,  Nels  August,  Vol.  1:571*. 
Nelson,  Nels  C,  Vol.  4:433. 
Nelson,  Oscar  E.,  see  Nilsson. 
Nelson,  Parley  Nebo,  Vol.  4:414. 
Nelson,  Rasmus  Peter,  Vol.  3:469. 
Nelson,  Robert  A.,  Vol.  4:394. 
Nelson,  Taylor,  Vol.  4:564. 
Nelson,  Thomas  B.,  Vol.  2:675. 
Nelson,  Victor  Daniel,  Vol.  4:462,  518. 
Nelson,  Waldemar  T.,  Vol.  3:184*. 
Neslen,  Charles  Clarence,  Vol.  2:520*. 
Neslen,  Grace  Cannon,  Vol.  4:263. 
Neslen,  Robert  F.,  Vol.  2:518*. 
Neslen,  Samuel  Francis,  Vol.  3:685. 
Netherlands  Mission,  Vol.  4:349-359. 
Nevada  Stake,  Vol.  4:546-547. 
Neves,  Hyrum  Lafayette,  Vol.  4:42. 
Neville,  George  A.,  Vol.  3:185*. 


804 


INDEX 


New  Zealand  Mission,  Vol.  4:360-362. 
Newbold,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:437. 
Newman,  Elijah,  Vol.  4:713. 
Newman,  Jay  Clarence,  Vol.  4:607. 
Newman,  Stephen  Burton,  Vol.  4:605. 
Newman,  William  J.,  Vol.  2:377*. 
Newton,  James  Henry,  Vol.  4:497. 
Nibley,   Charles   Wilson,  Vol.   3:766*; 

Vol.  4:727. 
Nibley,  Alexander,  Vol.  4:355*. 
Nibley,  Preston,  Vol.  3:686*;   Vol.  4: 

245. 
Nibley,  Rebecca  Neibaur,  Vol.  2:675*; 

Vol.  4:193. 
Nicholes,  Joseph  Kelly,  Vol.  4:594. 
Nicholls,  Sam.  Frederick,  Vol.  4:758*. 
Nichols,  Alfred  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:526. 
Nichols,  Alvin,  Vol.  4:430. 
Nichols,  De  Lore,  Vol.  4:217*. 
Nichols,  Samuel  Fred.,  Vol.  4:479. 
Nicholson,  John,  Vol.  4:684. 
Nicholson,  Laura  P.,  Vol.  4:264. 
Nickerson,  Freeman,  Vol.  4:690. 
Nickerson,  Levi  Stillman,  Vol.  4:691. 
Nickle,  Francis  Clement,  Vol.  4:626. 
Nicolaysen,  Morten  A.  C,  Vol.  3:802*. 
Nielsen,  Adolph  Martin,  Vol.  3:470*. 
Nielsen,  Anders,  Vol.  3:185*. 
Nielsen,  Anton,  Vol.  4:462. 
Nielsen,  Carl  Erastus,  Vol.  4:481. 
Nielsen,  Charles  M.,  Vol.  2:678*. 
Nielsen,  Christen  (Miller),  Vol.  2:268*. 
Nielsen,  Christian  Emil,  Vol.  4:498. 
Nielsen,  Christian  R.,  Vol.  2:568*. 
Nielsen,  Hans  B.,  Vol.  4:515. 
Nielsen,  Hans  W.,  Vol.  2:540*. 
Nielsen,  James  (Jens),  Vol.  4:430. 
Nielsen,  James,  Vol.  4:641. 
Nielsen,  James  E.,  Vol.  4:394. 
Nielsen,  James  Louis,  Vol.  4:537. 
Nielsen,   Jens    (Bluff    Ward),    Vol.    2: 

203*. 
Nielsen,    Jens     (Huntsville),    Vol.    2: 

344*. 
Nielsen,  Jesse  H.,  Vol.  4:495. 
Nielsen  (Nelson),  John  S.,  Vol.  4:155. 
Nielsen,  Lars   (Fountain  Green),  Vol. 

2:165. 
Nielsen,    Lars    (Leamington),   Vol.    4: 

452. 
Nielsen,  Lars  Peter,  Vol.  4:402. 
Nielsen,  Niels,  Vol.  2:679*. 
Nielsen,  Niels  Joseph,  Vol.  4:489. 
Nielsen,  Niels  Peter,  Vol.  4:550. 
Nielsen,  Peter,  Vol.  3:471. 
Nielsen,  Peter  Aagaard,  Vol.  4:606. 
Nielsen,  Peter  Anthon,  Vol.  1:573*. 
Nielsen,  Rasmus,  Vol.  2:680*. 
Nielsen,  Soren  Michael,  Vol.  4:155. 
Nielsen,  Thor  Christian,  Vol.  4:106. 
Nielsen,  Thor  Sherman,  Vol.  4:106. 
Nielsen,  Wyman  Isaac,  Vol.  4:518. 
Nielson,  Edgar  Odland,  Vol.  3:471*. 
Nielson,  Frihoff  G.,  Vol.  3:472. 
Nielson,  Frihoff  Peter,  Vol.  3:473*. 


Nielson,  Gustave,  Vol.  4:394. 
Nielson,  James  L.,  Vol.  2:787*. 
Nielson,  Oloff,  Vol.  2:322*. 
Nilson,  Andrew  Matts,  Vol.  4:629. 
Nilson,  Cecilia  Larson,  Vol.  2:306*. 
Nilson,  James  Anderson,  Vol.  2:306*. 
Nilson,  Nils  Mats,  Vol.  2:680*. 
Nilsson  (Nelson),  Oscar  E.,  Vol.  4:421. 
Nish,  Robert  T.,  Vol.  4:407. 
Nish,  Wm.  R.,  Vol.  4:448. 
Nixon,  James  W.,  Vol.  2:94*. 
Nixon,  Mary  Ann  Hall,  Vol.  2:681*. 
Nixon,  Thomas  Alonzo,  Vol.  2:48*. 
Nixon,  William,  Vol.  2:681*. 
Noall,  Irvin  Simon,  Vol.  4:156*. 
Noall,  Matthew,  Vol.  4:340. 
iNoble,  Edward  A.,  Vol.  4:597. 
Noble,  Geo.  Smith,  Vol.  4:414. 
Noble,  Jos.  Bates,  Vol.  4:691. 
Noble,  Monroe  Clarence,  Vol.  4:452. 
North  Central  States  Mission,  Vol.  4: 

362-363. 
North  Davis  Stake,  Vol.  4:548-549. 
North  Sanpete  Stake,  Vol.  4:549-550. 
North  Sevier  Stake,  Vol.  4:551-553. 
North  Weber  Stake,  Vol.  4:553-558. 
Northern  States   Mission,   Vol.  4:362- 

363. 
Northwestern  States  Mission,  Vol.  4: 

363-364. 
Norton,  Alanson,  Vol.  4:580. 
Norton,  John  Wesley,  Vol.  4:714. 
Norton,  Wm.  Alanson,  Vol.  4:580. 
Norwegian  Mission,  Vol.  4:365-366. 
Nowers,  Wilson  Gates,  Vol.  2:39. 
Nuhn,  Geo.  Christian,  Vol.  4:489. 
Nuttall,  Leonard  John,  Vol.  1:355*. 
Nuttall,  Wm.  E.,  Vol.  4:661. 
Nye,  Ephraim  H.,  Vol.  4:322. 
Nye,  John,   Vol.    1:397*. 
Nygren,  Evald  Edmund,  Vol.  4:445. 
Nystrom,  Mae  Taylor,  Vol.  4:264. 

O 

Oakley,  James,  Vol.  4:758. 
Oblad,  Zachariah  James,  Vol.  4:632. 
Oborn,  Clement  A.,  Vol.  4:759. 
Oborn,   John,   Vol.   2:326*. 
Obray,  Thomas  L.,  Vol.  4:346. 
Ockey,  James  Heber,  Vol.  4:499. 
Ogden,  Frank  Marsh,  Vol.  4:612. 
Ogden  Stake,  Vol.  4:558-561. 
Okelberry,    Peter    (Goshen),    Vol.    2: 

160*. 
Okelberry,    Peter,    (died   on    mission), 

Vol.  3:686. 
Okelberry,  William  Paul,  Vol.  3:473*. 
Okerlund,  George  W.,  Vol.  3:474*. 
Okerlund,  Ivan  George,  Vol.  3:686. 
Okerlund,  Ole,  Vol.  3:474. 
Old  Folks  Central  Committee,  Vol.  4: 

725-728. 
Oldham,  Royal  Price,  Vol.  3:687. 
Oldham,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:434. 
Oldham,  Samuel  Price,  Vol.  4:471. 


INDEX 


805 


Oldroyd,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:475*. 
Oldroyd,  Archibald,  Vol.  3:475. 
Oldroyd,  Archibald  T.,  Vol.  2:682*. 
Oldroyd,  John  Thomas,  Vol.  4:537. 
Oldroyd,  Willis  Andrew,  Vol.  4:664. 
Oleson,  John  Forest,  Vol.  4:545. 
Oliver,  Samuel,  Vol.  3:186*. 
Olpin,  Edwin  Dee,  Vol.  2:683*. 
Olpin,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:643,  661. 
Olsen,  Albert,  Vol.  4:417. 
Olsen,  Christian,  Vol.  3:187. 
Olsen,  Christine,  Vol.  3:187. 
Olsen,  Edward  A.,  Vol.  2:787. 
Olsen,  Frederick  A.,  Vol.  2:299*. 
Olsen,  Frederik,  Vol.  4:550. 
Olsen,  Gerald  Lund,  Vol.  4:462. 
Olsen,  Hans  Christensen,  Vol.  4:481. 
Olsen,  Henning,  Vol.  4:462. 
Olsen,  Hyrum  G.,  Vol.  4:509. 
Olsen,  Jesse  Jensen,  Vol.  4:430, 
Olsen,  John  Albert,  Vol.  4:590. 
Olsen,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:188. 
Olsen,  Louis  Christian,  Vol.  3:476. 
Olsen,  Niels  Albert,  Vol.  4:650. 
Olsen,  Ole  Christoffer,  Vol.  4:482. 
Olson,  Erick  Lehi,  Vol.  3:188. 
Olson,  John  Nils,  Vol.  3:476. 
Olson,  Erik  Wm.,  Vol.  4:580. 

Olson,   Lars  Larson,  Vol.   2:357*. 

Olson,  Lorenzo  Emil,  Vol.  4:434. 

Olson,  Nephi  Robert,  Vol.  3:687. 

Olson,  Olof  Angus,  Vol.  4:564. 

Olson,  Oscar  Mark,  Vol.  4:606. 

Olson,  Randine  G.,  Vol.  2:356*. 

Oneida  Stake,  Vol.  4:561-565. 

Openshaw,  Eli,  Vol.  4:545. 

Openshaw,  Frank  Myron,  Vol.  4:606. 

Openshaw,  Jonathan  E.,  Vol.  3:476*. 

Openshaw,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:526. 

Oquirrh  Stake,  Vol.  4:565-567. 

Ord,  John  William,  Vol.  2:112*. 

Orgill,   Edward,  Vol.   2:317*. 

Orgill,  Joseph  Alvin,  Vol.  4:661. 

Original  Pioneers  of  Utah,  Vol.  4:693- 
725. 

Orme,  Charles  Alvin,  Vol."  1:546*;  Vol. 
3:188;  Vol.  4:311*. 

Orme,  Edwin  Marshall,  Vol.  4:647. 

Orme,  Joseph  Ctoss,  Vol.  4:648. 

Orme,  Joseph  Roy,  Vol.  4:674. 

Orme,  Sam.  Worthington,  Vol.  4:674. 

Orme,  Silas  Cross,  Vol.  4:648. 

Orr,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:674. 

Orr,  Josiah,  Vol.  2:23. 

Orton,  Joseph,  Vol.   2:192*. 

Osborn,  Thos.  J.,  Vol.  4:542. 

Osguthorpe,  John,  Vol.  3:189*. 

Osguthorpe,  Lydia  R.,  Vol.  3:189*. 

Osmund,  George,  Vol.  1:348. 
Ossmen,  August  W.,  Vol.  2:53*. 
Ott,  James  Robert,  Vol.  4:571. 
Ott,  Joseph  Alma,  Vol.  4:759. 
Ottley,  Sidney  James,  Vol.  3:477. 
Ottosen,  Jens,  Vol.  2:567*. 
Ottosen,  Johanna  E.  N.,  Vol.  2:568*. 


Ovard,   Wm.   Martin,  Vol.   4:471. 
Overson,  Christian,  Vol.  2:146*. 
Overson,  David  P.,  Vol.  2:683,  812*. 
Overson,  Ove  Ephraim,  Vol.  2:684. 
Oveson.   Lars   Peter,  Vol.  2:92*. 
Oviatt,  George  Herman,  Vol.  3:190. 
Oviatt,  Henry  Herman,  Vol.  3:190. 
Owen,  Evan  Richard,  Vol.  4:489. 
Owen,  James,  Vol.  2:290*. 
Owen,  Seeley,  Vol.  4:714. 
Owens,  Clarence  E.,  Vol.  2:219*. 
Owens,  James  Clark  (Showlow),  Vol. 

2:217. 
Owens,  James  Clark  (Woodruff),  Vol. 

3:191. 
Owens,  Wm.  Thos.,  jun..  Vol.  4:571. 


Pace,  Harvey  A.,  Vol.  2:684. 

Pace,  Henry  Alexander,  Vol.  3:477*. 

Pace,  James,  Vol.  4:759. 

Pace,    .Julia    Ivins    Mac,    Vol.    4:292*. 

Pace,  Wilson  Daniel,  Vol.  4:573. 

Pack,  Frederick  James,  Vol.  4:218*. 

Pack,  John,  Vol.  4:714. 

Pack,  John   Austin,  Vol.  4:590. 

Pack,  Merrit  Newton,  Vol.  4:632. 

Pack,  Sadie  Grant,  Vol.  4:292*. 

Pack,  Silas  Mosher,  Vol.  2:231*. 

Pack,  Ward  E.,  Vol.  4:341,  632. 

Packard,  Nephi,  Vol.  4:504. 

Packard,  Noah,  Vol.  2:684. 

Packard,  Wm.  H.,  Vol.  4:417. 

Packer,  Ossian  Leonidas,  Vol.  3:478*. 

Page,  Ai-zo  Curtis,  Vol.  4:545. 

Page,  Esther  L.,  Vol.  2:421*. 

Page,  Hiram,  Vol.  1:277. 

Page,  John,  Vol.  2:420*. 

Page,  John  E.,  Vol.  1:92. 

Page,  Jonathan  S.,  Vol.  2:153*. 

Page,  Jonathan  S.,  jun..  Vol.  2:150*. 

Page,  Thomas  P.,  Vol.  2:318. 

Paget,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:648. 

Paice,  George,  Vol.  4:410. 

Palmer,  Asael  Exile,  Vol.  4:107. 

Palmer,  Geo.  Arthur,  Vol.  4:556. 

Palmer,  Isaac  James,  Vol.  4:602. 

Palmer,  James,  Vol.  4:449. 

Palmer,  James  Isaac,  Vol.  3:479. 

Palmer,  James  Watts,  Vol.  4:449. 

Palmer,  John  Frank,  Vol.  4:467. 

Palmer,  Thos.  Condie,  Vol.  4:564. 

Palmer,  Wm.  Moroni,  Vol.  4:108,  362. 

Palmer,  Wm.  Rees,  Vol.  4:157,  574. 

Palmyra   Stake,   Vol.   4:567. 

Panguitch  Stake,  Vol.  4:570. 

Park,  Allen  Eugene,  Vol.  4:482. 

Park,  Andrew  Findley,  Vol.  3:480*. 

Park,  Hamilton  G.,  Vol.  1:668*. 

Park,  James  Pollock,  Vol.  3:479*. 

Park,  John  R.,  Vol.  1:785*. 

Park,  Joseph  Gordon,  Vol.  2:466*. 

Park,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:648. 

Parkes,  Thos.  Henry  Geo.,  Vol.  4:497. 


806 


INDEX 


Parker,  Edwin,  Vol.  4:549. 
Parker,  Gilbert,  Vol.  3:191*. 
Parker,  James  Slack,  Vol.  2:21*. 
Parker,  Joseph   F.,   Vol.   3:192*. 
Parker,  Joseph  Wm.,  Vol.  3:480*. 
Parker,  Wyman  M.,  Vol.  4:539. 
Parker,  James  Elbert,  Vol.  4:42*,  626. 
Parker,  Wm.  Russell,  Vol.  4:506. 
Parkin,  John  William,  Vol.  3:803. 
Parkinson,  David,  Vol.  4:522. 
Parkinson,  Franklin  C,  Vol.  4:421. 
Parkinson,  Geo.  Arthur,  Vol.  4:410. 
Parkinson,    Bernice    R.,    Vol.    4:467. 
Parkinson,  Fannie  Woolley,  Vol.  4:293. 
Parkinson,  Geo.  C,  Vol.  1:438;  Vol.  4: 

364. 
Parkinson,  Samuel  C.,  Vol.  2:178*. 
Parkinson,  Samuel  Rose,  Vol.  2:177*. 
Parkinson,  Timothy  H.,  Vol.  3:193*. 
Parkinson,  Wm.  B.,  Vol.  4:539. 
Parkinson,  William  €.,  Vol.  1:305*. 
Parmley,  Thos.  Jenison,  Vol.  4:438. 
Parowan   Stake,  Vol.  4:572. 
Parrish,  Ernest,  Vol.  4:394. 
Parrish,  Ezra,  Vol.  4:539. 
Parrish,  Joseph  Alonzo,  Vol.  3:688*. 
Parry,  Caleb,  Vol.  3:688. 
Parry,  Edwin  F.,  Vol.  1:645*. 
Parry,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:685*. 
Parry,  Morris  Roberts,  Vol.  4:516. 
Parsons,  William,  Vol.  4:629. 
Partridge,  Edward,  Vol.  1 :218. 
Partridge,  Edward,  jun.,  Vol.   1:488*; 

Vol.  4:341*. 
Partridge,  Ernest  D.  A.,  Vol.  2:685*. 
Partridge,  Frank  H.,  Vol.  3:481*. 
Partridge,  Wm.  Clayton,  Vol.  4:417. 
Paskett,  Philip  J.,  Vol.  4:617. 
Passey,  Fredrick  William,  Vol.  3:482. 
Patrick,  Robert,  Vol.  1:665. 
Patten,  David  W.,  Vol.  1:76. 
Patten,  George,  Vol.  2:157. 
Patten,  William  Neuman,  Vol.  3:193*. 
Patterson,  Chas.  Gold,  Vol.  4:396. 
Patterson,  John  Wallace,  Vol.  4:434. 
Paul,  Edmund  R.,  Vol.  4:485. 
Paul,  Joshua  H.,  Vol.  1:619*. 
Paxman,  Albert  Reynolds,  Vol.  4:497. 
Paxman,  Arthur  Alfred,  Vol.  4:594. 
Paxman,  James  W.,  Vol.  1:517*. 
Paxman,  Samuel  Geo.,  Vol.  4:497. 
Paxman,  William,  Vol.  1:515*;  Vol.  4: 

308*. 
Paxton,  Robert  Anthony,  Vol.  3:689. 
Payne,  Claude  Brigham,  Vol.  4:552. 
Payne,  Harry  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:43*. 
Payne,  Junius  Edward,  Vol.  4:602. 
Peacock,  Brigham  J.,  jun..  Vol.  4:462. 
Peacock,  John  Lowry,  Vol.  4:624. 
Pearce,  Elijah  F.,  Vol.  4:308. 
Pearson,  Hans,  Vol.  2:333. 
Pearson,  Henry,  Vol.  1:575. 
Pearson,  Henry  M.,  Vol.  1:588*. 
Pearson,  Rulon  Vance,  Vol.  4:607. 
Peart,  Geo.  Archibald,  jun..  Vol.  4:670. 


Peart,  John  McPhail,  Vol.  4:44*. 
Peart,  Vilate,  Vol.  4:293. 
Peck,  Bryan  Ward,  Vol.  3:689. 
Peck,  Edwin  Martin,  Vol.  4:759. 
Peck,  Geo.  A.,  Vol.  4:602. 
Peck,  Leo,  Vol.  4:449. 
Peck,  Thorit,  Vol.  4:760. 
Pectol,  Ephraim  P.,  Vol.  3:482*. 
Pectol,  George  Peter,  Vol.  3:483*. 
Pedersen,  Hans  Andreas,  Vol.  4:513. 
Pedersen,  Olof  Ignatius,  Vol.  4:513. 
Peery,  David  H.,  Vol.  1:756*. 
Peery,  Joseph  Stras,  Vol.  4:760*. 
Pehrson,  Erik  J.,  Vol.  1:816*. 
Pehrson,  John  P.,  Vol.  1:575*. 
Pehrson,  Nels  A.,  Vol.  4:421. 
Peirce,  Eli  Harvey,  Vol.  2:686*. 
Peirce,  James   M.,  Vol.   2:688*. 
Peirce,  Mary  Ann  B.,  Vol.  2:688*. 
Peirce,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:687*. 
Pendleton,  Daniel  S.,  Vol.  2:689. 
Pendleton,  John  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:567. 
Penrose,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  1:256*;  Vol. 

3:769;  Vol.  4:245,  317*,  685*. 
Penrose,  Romania  B.  Pratt  (Dr.),  Vol. 

4:193. 
Perkes,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:685. 
Perkins,  Alice  Mellen,  Vol.  2:448*. 
Perkins,  Abraham  J.,  Vol.  2:198*. 
Perkins,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:608. 
Perkins,  David  M.,  Vol.  2:689. 
Perkins,  Edward  Martin,  Vol.  4:467. 
Perkins,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:447*. 
Perkins,  Nephi  M.,  Vol.  3:689. 
Perkins,  Reuben  Josiah,  Vol.  4:619. 
Perkins,  William  G.,  Vol.  2:429. 
Perkins,  William  Louis,  Vol.  3:484. 
Perkins,  Wm.  Wallace,  Vol.  4:532. 
Perry,  Heber  W.,  Vol.  4:430. 
Perry,  Henry  Morgan,  Vol.  3:484*. 
Perry,  John,  Vol.  3:690. 
Perry,  Leslie  Thomas,  Vol.  4:437. 
Perry,  Marion  Gilbert,  Vol.  4:407. 
Perry,  Orrin  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:430. 
Pershon,  Wm,  Franz  A.,  Vol.  4:161*. 
Peters,  Frederik,  Vol.  4:355*. 
Peters,  John  David,  Vol.  2:63*. 
Peters,  Morris  R.,  Vol.  4:430. 
Petersen,  Adam  Lind,  Vol.  3:485*. 
Petersen,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:485. 
Petersen,  Andrew  Lothrap,  Vol.  4:547. 
Petersen,  Andrew  P.,  Vol.  4:449. 
Petei'sen,  Conrad  Erastus,  Vol.  4:552. 
Petersen,  Christian  A.,  Vol.  4:482. 
Petersen,  Erastus  P.,  Vol.  4:674. 
Petersen,  Hans  F.,  Vol.  2:554*. 
Petersen,  Hans  Therkild,  Vol.  3:194. 
Petersen,  Jens,  Vol.  2:345*. 
Petersen,  Jesper,  Vol.  3:690. 
Petersen,  Jos.  Lind,  Vol.  4:328*,  560*. 
Petersen,  Joseph  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:620. 
Petersen,  Lars,  Vol.  2:345*. 
Petersen,  Lars  C,  Vol.  1:427*. 
Petersen,  Louis  A.,  Vol.  1:550. 
Petersen,  Mette  C.  C,  Vol.  2:691*. 


INDEX 


807 


Petersen,  Niels  M.,  Vol.  2:690"=. 
Petersen,  Niels  R.,  Vol.  2:225*. 
Petersen,  Ole,  Vol.  4:407. 
Petersen,  Oluif,  Vol.  2:66*. 
Petersen,  Orrin   Franklin,  Vol.  4:552. 
Petersen,   Parley   Peter,  Vol.  4:506. 
Petersen,  P.  Melvin,  Vol.  4:219. 
Petersen,   Peter,  Vol.   1:798*. 
Petersen,  Peter  A.,  Vol.  2:161. 
Petersen,  Rozilla  K.,  Vol.  2:67*. 
Petersen,  Wilford  C,  Vol.  4:462. 
Peterson,  Albert,  Vol.  4:762. 
Peterson,  Albert  R.,  Vol.  4:365*,  462. 
Peterson,  Andreas,  Vol.  3:690;  Vol.  4: 

372*    383 
Peterson,  Andrew  C,  Vol.  3:486*. 
Peterson,  Andrew  L.,  Vol.  4:550. 
Peterson,   Angus    Elmer,   Vol.   4:485. 
Peterson,   Arthur   E.,  Vol.   4:245. 
Peterson,    Brigham    Y.,    Vol.    2:193*. 
Peterson,  Canute,  Vol.  1:362*;  Vol.  4: 

373* 
Peterson,   Carl   E.,   Vol.   4:328,   556. 
Peterson,   Carl   Enoch,  Vol.  4:565. 
Peterson,  Chas.  Henry,  Vol.  4:629. 
Peterson,    Chas.    Shreeve,   Vol.   4:396, 
539. 

Peterson,    Christian,   Vol.   2:344. 

Peterson,    Elwood    Lynn,   Vol.   4:158*. 

Peterson,    Emil    Ephraim,   Vol.   4:399. 

Peterson,  Erastus  P.,  Vol.  4:498. 

Peterson,  Geo.  Enoch,  Vol.  4:394. 

Peterson,  Henry  Lewis,  Vol.  4:526. 

Peterson,  Hugo  D.  E.,  Vol.  4:159*,  383. 

Peterson,  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:522. 

Peterson,  James  Ammon,  Vol.  4:603. 

Peterson,  James  C,  Vol.  2:788*. 

Peterson,  James  E.,  Vol.  2:184*. 

Peterson,  James  Morten,  Vol.  2:691. 

Peterson,  James  O.,  Vol.  4:434. 

Peterson,  Jesse  Y.,  Vol.  4:670. 

Peterson,  John,  Vol.  4:608. 

Peterson,  John   Christian,  Vol.  4:636. 

Peterson,  John  Henry,  Vol.  4:414. 

Peterson,  John  T.,  Vol.  4:402. 

Peterson,  Jos.  Franklin,  Vol.  4:552. 

Peterson,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:}.69*. 

Peterson,  Lawrence,  Vol.  3:194*. 

Peterson,  Linnius  C,  Vol.  3:487*. 

Peterson,  Mary  Jensen,  Vol.  2:553*. 

Peterson,  Mons,  Vol.  4:608. 

Peterson,  Nephi,  Vol.  4:399. 

Peterson,  Niels,  Vol.   2:553*. 

Peterson,  Ole  Bertrand,  Vol.  4:377. 

Peterson,  Oliver  Lome,  Vol.  4:402. 

Peterson,  Peter  B.,  Vol.  2:788*. 

Peterson,  Peter  Canute,  Vol.  4:624. 

Peterson,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:510. 

Peterson,  Thos.  Leonard,  Vol.  4:505. 

Peterson,  Victor  Emanuel,  Vol.  4:513. 

Peterson,  Virgil   Hyrum,  Vol.   4:108*. 

Pett,  James,  Vol.  1:390*.  . 

Pettegrew,  Alma  H.,  Vol.  4:245. 

Pettegrew,  David,  Vol.  1:618*. 

Pettigrew,  Wm.  Helaman,  Vol.  4:498. 


Pettit,  Emma  S.  B.,  Vol.  2:406*. 
Pettit,  Ethan,  Vol.  2:414*. 
Pettit,  Jesse  Raymond,  Vol.  4:576. 
Pettit,  John  Edw.,  Vol.  4:438,  633. 
Pettit,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  2:405*. 
Pettit,  Lucy  A.  M.,  Vol.  2:405*. 
Pettit,  Margaret  E.,  Vol.  2:414*. 
Pettit,  Mildred  Tanner,  Vol.  4:293. 
Petty,  Lewis  James,  Vol.   3:195. 
Petty,  Wm.  Geo.,  Vol.  4:624. 
Petty,  Wm.  H.,  Vol.  4:542. 
Pexton,  Jude  Nathaniel  C,  Vol.  4:498. 
Phelps,  Henry  Smith,  Vol.  2:138. 
Phelps,   Laura  Lindon  F.,  Vol.  4:294. 
Phelps,  Morris,  Vol.  1:373*. 
Phelps,  William  Wines,  Vol.  3:692*. 
Phillips,  Edward,  Vol.  3:195,  697*. 
Phillips,  Ishmael,  Vol.  1:692*. 
Phillips,  Walter  F.,  Vol.  3:698. 
Phippen,  Melvin  Earl,  Vol.  4:583. 
Pickett,    Eugene,  Vol.   4:441. 

Pickett,  Moroni,  Vol.  4:441. 

Pickett,   Oliver  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:441. 

Picture   of   Relief  Society  Pi'esidents, 
Vol.  4:178. 

Picture  of  Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.  Board  (1936), 
Vol.  4:230. 

Pieper,  Frederick,  Vol.  4:356*. 

Piei'ce,  Arwell  Lee,  Vol.  4:48*. 

Pierce,  Eli  Harvey,  Vol.  4:714. 

Pierce,   Isaac   Riley,   Vol.   2:358*. 

Pierce,  Isaac  Washington,  Vol.  4:44*. 

Pierce,  Mary  Brentnell  D.,  Vol.  4:51*. 

Pierce,  Peter  Nelson,  Vol.  4:407. 

Pierson,   Harmon   Dudley,  Vol.   4:407. 

Piggott,  George  W.,  Vol.   2:692*. 

Pilling,  Richard,  Vol.   1:386*. 

Pincock,  Geo.  Albert,  Vol.  4:675. 

Pincock,  Richard  D.,  Vol.  4:666. 

Pingree,  Franklin,  Vol.  4:464. 

Pingree,  Job,  Vol.  4:332. 

Pinney,   Robt.   Wm.,   Vol.   4:475. 

Pioneer  Stake,  Vol.  4:574-576. 

Pioneers  (Original),  Vol.  4:693-725. 

Pitcher,   Arthur   Wm.,   Vol.   4:394. 

Pitcher,  Walter  Edward,  Vol.  4:394. 

Pitchforth,  Mary  Mitchell,  Vol.  4:194. 

Pitkin,    George    O.,    Vol.    1:433*. 

Pixton,   Joseph   Cooper,   Vol.   3:196*. 

Pixton,  Seth  Silcock,  Vol.  2:316. 

Piatt,  Franklin  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:465. 

Piatt,  James  Henry,  Vol.  4:556. 

Piatt,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:655. 

Plowman,  Christian  Johan,  Vol.  4:414. 

Plowman,  John  Jacobsen,  Vol.  3:196*. 

Pocatello  Stake,  Vol.  4:576-579. 

Pollard,    Joseph,   Vol.    1:635*. 

Pomeroy,  Francis  M.,  Vol.  3:488*;  Vol. 
4:714. 

Pomeroy,  Franklin  T.,  Vol.   2:137*. 

Pomeroy,  Talma  E.,  Vol.  4:52*,  348. 

Pond,   Brigham,   Vol.   2:41. 
Pond,  Joseph  L.,  Vol.  3:198*. 

Pond,  Joseph  Thorn,  Vol.  2:26*. 
Pond,  Lewis   S.,  Vol.   1:301*. 


808 


INDEX 


Pond,  Lysander  C,  Vol.  1:315*. 
Pond,  Moses  Alonzo,  Vol.  4:578. 
Pond,   Noah   S.,  Vol.    1:314*;   Vol.   4: 

362*. 
Pond,  Zera  Whittle,  Vol.  3:198*. 
Pope,  Chas.  Wallace,  Vol.  4:402. 
Pope,  George  H.,  Vol.  2:694*. 
Pope,  Robert,  Vol.  4:403. 
Porter,  Aaron  Benjamin,  Vol.  3:199*. 
Porter,  Abinadi,  Vol.  4:578. 
Porter,  Alva  Sylvanus,  Vol.  4:603. 
Porter,  Arthur,  jun.,  Vol.  4:471. 
Porter,  Chas.  Worthy,  Vol.  4:629. 
Porter,  Geo.  Myron,  Vol.  4:417. 
Porter,   Hyrum   K.,  Vol.  4:539. 
Porter,  James   Henry,   Vol.   4:603. 
Porter,  Joseph  Rich,  Vol.  2:148*. 
Porter,  Lyman  Wight,  Vol.  3:491*. 
Porter,  Margaret  L.  B.,  Vol.  2:790*. 
Porter,   Nahum,  Vol.  2:174*. 
Porter,  Nahum  Boyd,  Vol.  4:564. 
Porter,  Nathan   T.,  Vol.  2:789*. 
Porter,  Omni  A.,  Vol.  4:578. 
Porter,  Orson  Merit,  Vol.  4:417. 
Porter,    (Roy)    Ray  S.,  Vol.  4:161. 
Porter,   Royal   Ernest,   Vol.   4:421. 
Porter,  Sanford,  Vol.  4:622. 
Porter,  William  P.,  Vol.  2:789*. 
Portneuf   Stake,  Vol.   4:579-582. 
Potter,  Earl  Heber,  Vol.  4:675. 
Potter,  John,  Vol.  4:438. 
Potter,   Robert  John,  Vol.   4:54*. 
Poulsen,   Andrew,   Vol.   2:693*. 
Poulsen,    Niels    Christian,    Vol.   4:612. 
Poulsen,  Otto  J.,  Vol.  4:614. 
Poulsen,  Paul,  Vol.  2:694*. 
Poulson,  Christian  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:399. 
Poulson,  John  Christian,  Vol.   3:491* 
Poulton,  James,  Vol.  2:790*. 
Poulton,  Ralph,  Vol.  4:658. 
Powell,  Albert  Harris,  Vol.  4:545. 
Powell,   David,   Vol.  4:715. 
Powell,  Thomas  Ezra,  Vol.  4:556. 
Powell,   Wilber   Morgan,   Vol.   4:633. 
Pratt,    Addison,    Vol.    3:698;    Vol.    4: 

323,  377. 
Pratt,  Helaman,  Vol.  4:347,  500,  612. 
Pratt,   Jonathan   Burgess,   Vol.   4:452. 
Pratt,   Mathoni   M.,  Vol.   4:485. 
Pratt,  Mathoni  Wood,  Vol.  4:641. 
Pratt,  Moroni  W.,  Vol.   1:817*. 
Pratt,  Nephi,  Vol.  4:364. 
Pratt,  Orson,  Vol.  1:87*;  Vol.  4:317*, 

332,  715. 
Pratt,  Parley   P.,  Vol.   1:83*;   Vol.   4: 

317*,  323,  325*,  332. 
Pratt,  Rey  L.,  Vol.  4:348. 
Pratt,  Wm.  Franklin,  Vol.  4:453. 
Pratt,  Wm.  Holbert,  Vol.  4:453. 
Preece,  Alma,  Vol.  4:653. 
Presidents  of   Missions,  Vol.  4:305. 
Preston,     William     B.,     Vol.     1:232*; 

Vol.  3:771;  Vol.  4:727. 
Prestwich,  Orson,  Vol.  4:614. 
Price,   Brigham   Francis,  Vol.   3:197*. 


Price,  David  Evan,  Vol.  4:522. 

Price,    Daniel    Shepherd,   Vol.   4:403. 

Price,  Edmond,  Vol.  2:695*. 

Price,   Geo.   F.,  Vol.   4:526. 

Price,  Isaac  Thos.,  Vol.  4:403. 

Price,  James  Robert,  Vol.  4:526. 

Price,  Robert,  Vol.  2:36*. 

Price,  William,  Vol.  4:645. 

Priest,  John,  Vol.   1:450. 

Primary  Association  Picture,  Vol.  4: 

272*. 
Probst,  Jacob,  Vol.  2:13. 
Proctor,  John,  Vol.  4:510. 
Pugh,  Chas.  Robert,  Vol.  4:503. 
Pugh,  Chas.   Vastine,  Vol.  4:516. 
Pugh,  Edward  K.,  Vol.  2:132. 
Pugmire,  Edward  McKay,  Vol.  4:403. 
Pugmire,  Geo.  Y.,  Vol.  4:421. 
Pugmire,  Henry   Nelson,  Vol.  3:199*. 
Pugmire,  Jonathan,  jun..  Vol.   2:430. 
Pugmire,   Vincent   McK.,   Vol.   3:200*. 
Pulsipher,   Charles,  Vol.  4:462. 
Pulsipher,  Howard,  Vol.  4:532. 
Pulsipher,    Zera,    Vol.    1:194. 
Purdie,  William,  Vol.  2:102*. 
Putnam,    Savannah    C,    Vol.    1:471. 
Pye,  Caleb  Enoch,  Vol.  3:492*. 
Pye,  Mary  Francis  K.,  Vol.  4:162*. 
Pyper,  Alexander  C,  Vol.  1:627*. 
Pyper,   George   D.,   Vol.    1:669*;    Vol. 

4:220*. 


Q 


Quayle,  John,  Vol.  3:200*. 
Quayle,  Philip,  Vol.  4:564. 
Quibell,  Joseph  A.,  Vol.  1:472. 
Quinn,  James  Alfred,  Vol.  4:578. 
Quinney,    Joseph,    jun..    Vol.    3:201*; 

Vol.   4:324*. 
Quist,  Albert,  Vol.  2:695*. 
Quist,  David  E.,  Vol.  4:507. 
Quist,  John  Anderson,  Vol.  2:696*. 
Quist,  Jos.  Franklin,  Vol.  4:445. 

R 

Rackham,  John,  Vol.  4:556. 
Radley,  James    H.,   Vol.   4:578. 
Raft  River   Stake,  Vol.   4:582-584. 
Raile,  Vilate  Schofield  C,  Vol.  4:294. 
Raleigh,  Alonzo  H.,  Vol.  1:672*. 
Ralphs,   Ephraim,   Vol.   2:189*. 
Rammell,   Parley  Samuel,  Vol.  4:641. 
Rampton,  Ephraim,  Vol.  2:189*. 
Rampton,    Henry,    Vol.    3:493*. 
Randall,  Clarence  Dilmon,  Vol.  4:434. 
Randall,   Melvin   Harley,   Vol.    3:202*. 
Randall,  Melvin  Howard,  Vol.  4:539. 
Randall,   Orrin    Harley,   Vol.   2:147. 
Ransom,  James  Austin,  Vol.  3:494*. 
Rappleye,  Ammon  Tunis,  Vol.  4:528. 
Rappleye,  Tunis,  Vol.  2:791*;  Vol.  4: 

715*. 
Rasband,   Frederick,  Vol.  2:697*. 
Rasband,  Joseph  A.,  Vol.  1:478. 


INDEX 


809 


Rasmussen,  Alma  E.,  Vol.  4:510. 
Rasmussen,  Althen  J.,  Vol.  4:762. 
Rasmussen,  Arelius  Peter,  Vol.  4:458. 
Rasmussen,  Chas.  Alma,  Vol.  4:482. 
Rasmussen,    Daniel,   Vol.    2:572. 
Rasmussen,  Hans,  Vol.  2:697*. 
Rasmussen,  James,  Vol.  4:482. 
Rasmussen,  James  Peter,  Vol.  4:467. 
Rasmussen,  Niels,  Vol.  1:596*;  Vol.  3: 

202. 
Rasmussen,  Niels  Peter  (Springdale), 

Vol.  3:494. 
Rasmussen,  Niels  Peter  (Levan),  Vol. 

4:498. 
Rasmussen,  Peter,  Vol.  4:552. 
Rasmussen,   Peter   Christian,   Vol.   2: 

108*;  Vol.  3:699. 
Rasmussen,  Rasmus,  Vol.  4:565. 
Rasmussen,  Rasmus,  jun.,  Vol.  1:443*. 
Rasmussen,  Raymond  R.,  Vol.  4:445. 
Rasmussen,   Soren,   Vol.,    1:574*;   Vol. 

3:495*;  Vol.  4:330*. 
Ratcliffe,  Emma  J.  E^.,  Vol.  3:203*. 
Ratcliffe,  James,  Vol.  3:202*. 
Ravsten,  Bengt  M.,  Vol.  3:699*. 
Ravsten,  John,  Vol.  3:204*. 
Rawlings,  Henry  Helaman,  Vol.  4:467, 
Rawlings,  Walter,  jun..  Vol.  4:468,  641. 
Rawlins,  Franklin  A.,  Vol.  2:41. 
Rawlins,  Joseph  Sharp,  Vol.  4:445. 
Rawson,  Wilford  Woodruff,  Vol.  4:560. 

Rawson,  Wm.  John,  Vol.  4:655. 

Read,  Charles,  Vol.  3:700. 

Read,  Thos.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:666. 

Read,  Walter  P.,  Vol.  2:494*. 

Reber,  Harold  Joseph,  Vol.  4:532. 

Reber,  Joseph  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:532. 

Redd,  Amasa  Jay,  Vol.  4:608. 

Redd,  Lemuel  H.,  Vol.  2:116*. 

Redd,  Lemuel  H.,  jun..  Vol.  3:204*. 

Redd,  Wayne  H.,  Vol.  1:353*. 

Redd,  William  A.,  Vol.  1:539*. 

Redden,  Return  Jackson,  Vol.  4:715. 

Reddish,  Fredrick  Herbert,  Vol.  4:492. 

Reddish,  Henry  E.,  Vol.  4:578. 

Reece,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:152*. 

Reed,  Ira,  Vol.  2:413*. 

Reed,  John  Beaverly,  Vol.  4:610. 

Reed,  Levi  Ward,  Vol.  2:412*. 

Reed,  Margaret  P.,  Vol.  2:413*. 

Reed,  Robert,  Vol.  4:603. 

Reeder,  Jesse  C,  Vol.  4:434. 

Rees,  Alfred  C,  Vol.  4:221. 

Rees,  David  James,  Vol.  4:410. 

Rees,  John  Evans,  Vol.  2:583*. 

Rees,  Thomas  D.,  jun..  Vol.  4:498,  610. 

Rees,   Willard   Arthur,  Vol.  4:410. 

Reese,  Chas.  W.  Vol.  4:645. 

Reese,  Howard,  Vol.  3:495. 

Reeve,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:145. 

Reid,  Alfred  C,  Vol.  2:698*. 

Reid,  Edgar  Thomas,  Vol.  4:624. 

Reid,  George  A.,  Vol.  2:446*. 

Reid,   Henry  McEwan,  Vol.   4:462. 

Reid,  Hugh  Alexander,  Vol.  4:55. 


Reid,  William  T.,  Vol.  2:791*. 
Reidhead,  John,  Vol.  2:221. 
Reiser,  Albert  Hamer,  Vol.  4:221*. 
Reiser,  Albert  S.,  Vol.  1:780*. 
Reiser,  Anna  C.  A.,  Vol.  2:427*. 
Reiser,  Henry,  Vol.  2:424*. 
Reiser,  Magdalena   S.,  Vol.  2:426. 
Reiser,  Margaret  V.  B.,  Vol.  2:428*. 
Reiser,  Susanna  Rupp,  Vol.  2:425*. 
Relief    Society,    Vol.    4:177-201. 
Remington,  Fuller  R.,  Vol.  4:653. 
Remington,  Lydia  R.  B.,  Vol.  2:239*. 
Rencher,  Wm.  David,  Vol.  4:597. 
Renstrom,  Andrew   P.,   Vol.  2:698*. 
Reynolds,  Alice  Louise,  Vol.  4:194. 
Reynolds,  Amasa  Owen,  Vol.  4:597. 
Reynolds,  Francis  M.,  Vol.  3:496. 
Reynolds,  George,  Vol.  1:206*;  Vol.  3: 

771;  Vol.  4:685*. 
Reynolds,  Harold  G.,  Vol.  4:175*. 
Reynolds,  Henry,  Vol.  2:233*. 
Reynolds,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:598."^ 
Rhees,  Reuben  Thomas,  Vol.  3:496. 
Rhodehouse,  John  Wm.,  Vol.  4:675. 
Rhodes,  Jane  Williams,  Vol.  2:699*. 
Rhodes,  William  Henry,  Vol.  2:699*. 
Rice,  Oscar  Franklin,  Vol.  4:513. 
Rich,  Abel  Sargent,  Vol.  4:430. 
Rich,  Alice  McLachlan,  Vol.  4:163. 

Rich,  Benjamin  Erastus,  Vol.  3:206*; 
Vol.  4:332*,  349,  381. 

Rich,  Charles  C,  Vol.  1:102*;  Vol.  4: 
324*. 

Rich,  Daniel  Coulsen,  Vol.  4:403. 

Rich,  Edward  Charles,  Vol.  3:207*. 

Rich,  Edward  Stokes,  Vol.  4:480. 

Rich,  Harriet  Sargent,  Vol.  3:211*. 

Rich,  James  Henry,  Vol.  4:556. 

Rich,  Leonard,  Vol.   1:189. 

Rich,  Mary  Ann,  Vol.  3:497*. 

Rich,  Sarah  De  A.  P.,  Vol.  3:207*. 

Rich,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:212. 

Rich,  Thomas,  jun..   Vol.   3:213*. 

Rich,   Wm.   Henry,  Vol.  4:540. 

Rich,  William  L.,  Vol.  2:28*. 

Richards,  Alma  Pascal,  Vol.  3:701. 

Richards,  Barbara  Howell,  Vol.  4:194. 

Richards,  Claude,  Vol.  2:700*;  Vol.  4: 
245*. 

Richards,  Eleanor  R.  J.,  Vol.  4:294*. 

Richards,  Emanuel  H.,  Vol.  2:331*. 

Richards,  Emily  Sophia,  Vol.  2:700*; 
Vol.  4:109*,  194. 

Richards,   Evan  Alvin,  Vol.  2:150. 

Richards,  Ezra  Foss,  Vol.  4:308. 

Richards,    Frankhn    D.,    Vol.    1:115*; 
Vol.  4:317*,  685*. 

Richards,  Franklin  Snyder,  Vol.  4:55*. 

Richards,    George    Franklin,    Vol.   1: 
544*;  Vol.  3:772*;  Vol.  4:245,  318*. 

Richards,  Georgina  S.  F.,  Vol.  4:294. 

Richards,  Henry  P.,  Vol.  1:813*. 

Richards,  Jane  Snyder,  Vol.  4:195. 

Richards,  Jesse  Snyder,  Vol.  3:213*. 

Richards,  Joel,  Vol.  4:465. 


810 


INDEX 


Richards,  John  A.,  Vol.  3:702. 
Richards,  Joseph  Hill,  Vol.  2:213*. 
Richards,   LeGrand,  Vol.   4:356*,   477. 
Richards,  Levi   Willard,  Vol.  3:703*. 
Richards,  Loren  L.,  Vol.  4:522. 
Richards,  Lulu  Greene,  Vol.  4:295*. 
Richards,  Lynn   Stephen,  Vol.  4:222*. 
Richards,  Mary  A.  P.,  Vol.  3:214*. 
Richards,    Morgan,    jun..   Vol.    3:499*. 
Richards,  Myron  John,  Vol.  2:134*. 
Richards,  Preston  D.,  Vol.  2:704*;  Vol. 

4:246. 
Richards,  Ralph  Ashton,  Vol.  4:633. 
Richards,  Ralph  C,  Vol.  4:407. 
Richards,  Samuel  W.,  Vol.  1:718*;  Vol. 

4  "318*     332 
Richards',  Silas,  Vol.  2:327. 
Richards,   Silas   Leroy,  Vol.  4:480. 
Richards,   Stayner,    Vol.   4:477. 
Richards,  Stephen  L.,  Vol.  3:773*. 
Richards,    Thos.    Wm.,   Vol.   4:522. 
Richards,  Wilford  W.,  jun..  Vol.  4:407. 
Richards,  Wilford  W.,  sen..  Vol.  4:534. 
Richards,  Willard,  Vol.  1:53*;  Vol.  4: 

715. 
Richards,  Willard  B.,  Vol.  2:471. 
Richards,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:522. 
Richards,  Wm.  Pierson,  Vol.  4:633. 
Richardson,  Archibald   S.,  Vol.  4:653. 
Richardson,   Ebenezer,   Vol.   4:379. 
Richardson,  John,  Vol.  2:457*. 
Richardson,  Joseph  J.,  Vol.  3:214*. 
Richardson,  Myron  B.,  Vol.  3:215*. 
Richardson,   Ovey   Albert,  Vol.   4:590. 
Richardson,  Shadrach,   Vol.  2:160. 
Richins,  Edward,  Vol.  4:633. 
Richins,  Jesse  Wilmott,  Vol.  4:164*. 
Richins,  Mary  Ann  H.,  Vol.  2:398. 
Richins,   Moroni,   Vol.  4:633. 
Richins,  Osborne,  Vol.  4:655. 
Richins,  Parley  Thomas,  Vol.  4:59. 
Richter,  Fredrick   Emil,  Vol.  4:762. 
Ricks,  Alfred,  Vol.  4:472. 
Ricks,  Henry  H.  P.,  Vol.  4:472. 
Ricks,   Hyrum,  Vol.   4:472. 
Ricks,  Joel,  Vol.   2:70. 
Ricks,  Joel,  jun.,  Vol.  2:69. 
Ricks,  Orson,  Vol.  4:472. 
Ricks,  Peter  Jeppesen,  Vol.  4:472. 
Ricks,  Thomas  E.,  Vol.  1:455*;  Vol.  4: 

349. 
Rider,  John  McDonald,  Vol.  4:617. 
Rider,  Oscar  L.,  Vol.  4:421. 
Ridges,   Wilford   Owen,   Vol.    4:542. 
Riding,  Alfred  Hall,  Vol.  2:183. 
Rigby,  Fannie  J.,  Vol.  2:792. 
Rigby,  James   (Fairview),  Vol.  2:792. 
Rigby,    James    (Pratt    Ward,    Idaho), 

Vol.  4:641. 
Rigby,  Jos.  Eckersley,  Vol.  4:472. 
Rigby,  Martin  Clark,  Vol.  3:500*. 
Rigby,  Wm.  Frederick,  Vol.  4:414. 
Rigby  Stake,  Vol.  4:584-588. 
Rigdon,  Sidney,  Vol.  1:31*. 
Riggs,  John  Lyle,  Vol.  4:526. 


Riley,  James   Hyrum,  Vol.  4:59. 
Ririe,  David,  Vol.  3:216*. 
Ririe,  James  Alfred,  Vol.  4:636. 
Ririe,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:542. 
Risenmay,  Geo.   Henry,  Vol.  4:617. 
Riser,  Geo.  C,  Vol.  4:337. 
Ritchie,  James,  Vol.  4:557. 
Ritchie,  John  McAffee,  Vol.  2:10;  Vol. 

3:216. 
Ritchie,  Lawrence,  Vol.  4:557. 
Riter,  Wm.  W.,  Vol.  4:387. 
Robbins,  Charles  B.,  Vol.  2:74*. 
Robbins,    Hulbert   Bross,   Vol.   3:217*. 
Robbins,  Jos.   B.,  Vol.  4:540. 
Robbins,  Lorenzo   Wilson,  Vol.  4:434. 
Roberts,  Brigham  H.,  Vol.  1:205*;  Vol. 

4:246,  333*. 
Roberts,  Lillian  Cameron,  Vol.  4:195. 
Roberts,  Walter,  Vol.  4:453. 
Roberts,  Walton  A.,  Vol.  2:20*. 
Roberts,  Wilham  D.,  Vol.  1:498*. 
Robertson,  Cyrus  Snell,  Vol.  4:417. 
Robertson,   Ezra   Finch,  Vol.  4:633. 
Robertson,  Hilton  A.,  Vol.  4:346,  505. 
Robertson,  James  M.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:641. 
Robertson,  Jasper,  Vol.  4:463. 
Robertson,  Joseph  Leon,  Vol.  4:421. 
Robins,  James  Wells,  Vol.  4:529. 
Robinson,    Benj.,   H.,   Vol.    1:529*. 
Robinson,   Carl,   Vol.   4:629. 
Robinson,  Edward  W.,  Vol.  4:391. 
Robinson,  George  Henry,  Vol.  3:218*. 
Robinson,  George  Huber,  Vol.  3:222*. 
Robinson,   George   W.,   Vol.   1:252. 
Robinson,  James  H.,  Vol.  3:218*. 
Robinson,   John,  Vol.   4:668. 
Robinson,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  3:219*;  Vol. 

4:323*. 
Robinson,  Joseph   Lee,  Vol.  3:220*. 
Robinson,  Lot,  Vol.  4:396. 
Robinson,  Oliver  LeGrande,  Vol.  4:675. 
Robinson,  Richard  S.,  Vol.  3:221*. 
Robinson,  Sam.  John,  Vol.  4:500. 
Robinson,  Thomas  Henry,  Vol.  4:607. 
Robinson,  William   D.,   Vol.  3:501. 
Robinson,  Wm.  O.,  Vol.  4:246. 
Robison,  Charles  E.,  Vol.  3:706. 
Robison,  Daniel,  Vol.  3:217*. 
Robison,  Daniel  A.,  Vol.  2:147*. 
Robison,  Franklin  A.,  Vol.  2:144*. 
Robison,  Joseph  B.,  Vol.  4:532. 
Robison,  Joseph  V.,  Vol.  4:529. 
Robison,  Louise  Y.,  Vol.  4:178*,  195*. 
Robison,  Parker  Pratt,  Vol.  4:529. 
Robison,  Willis  E.,  Vol.  1:342*. 
Robson,  Charles   I.,  Vol.   1:558*. 
Robson,  John   Elmer,  Vol.   4:414. 
Rockwell,  Orrin  Porter,  Vol.  4:716. 
Rockwood,  Albert  P.,  Vol.  1:194*;  Vol. 

4:716*. 
Rockwood,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  1:454. 
Rockwood,  Claude  H.,  Vol.  4:762. 
Rockwood,  Julius  Apollos,  Vol.  4:477. 
Roderick,   John   P.,   Vol.   4:522. 
Roe,  Thomas  Wm.,  Vol.  4:449. 


INDEX 


811 


Rogers,  Aurelia  S.,  Vol.  3:224*;  Vol. 

4:295*. 
Rogers,  Henry  Clay,  Vol.  4:526. 
Rogers,  Henry  P.,  Vol.  3:706. 
Rogers,  Henry  Tooles,  Vol.  2:174*. 
Rogers,  Isaac  Higbee,  Vol.  4:526. 
Rogers,   Noah,  Vol.   4:377. 
Rogers,  Sam.  Hollister,  Vol.  4:574. 
Rogers,  Thomas,  Vol.  3:223*. 
Rogerson,  Daniel  Edwin,  Vol.  4:421. 
Roghaar,   John,   Vol.   4:399. 
Rohwer,   Charles   J.,   Vol.   2:69. 
Roland,  Erma,  Vol.  4:264. 
Rolapp,    Henry   H.,   Vol.   3:501*;    Vol. 

4:223,  333*. 
Rolfe,  Benjamin  W.,  Vol.  4:716. 
Rollins,  Henry  Melvin,  Vol.  4:519. 
Rollins,  James   Henry,  Vol.  4:410. 
Romney,    Emma    Phillips,   Vol.    4:296. 
Romney,  Eugene,  Vol.  4:603. 
Romney,  Gaskell,  Vol.  4:510. 
Romney,  George,  Vol.  1:678*. 
Romney,  Geo.  Samuel,  Vol.  4:472. 
Romney,    Junius,    Vol.    4:500. 
Romney,  Margaret  A.  T.,  Vol.  2:538*. 
Romney,  Miles  Park,  Vol.  4:594. 
Romney,  Orson  D.,  Vol.  4:60*,  361*. 
Romney,  Park,  Vol.  4:414. 
Romrell,  George  H.,  Vol.  3:502. 
Rond,  Albertus,  Vol.  4:762. 
Rooker,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:717. 
Roosevelt    Stake,    Vol.   4:588-591. 
Rose,  Armond  Thomas,  Vol.  4:621^  >X 

Rose,  Elmer  Lee,  Vol.  4:425.   • 
Rose,  Erastus  Francisco,  Vol.  3:222*. 

Rose,  John  Henry,  Vol.  4:540. 

Rose,  Josephine  E.  R.,  Vol.  3:223*. 

Rose,  Leon  Alley,  Vol.  3:503*. 

Rose,  Thos.  Edmond,  Vol.  4:468. 

Rosengren,  Gustave  L.,  Vol.  2:110. 

Roskelley,  James,  Vol.   3:225. 

Roskelley,  Marriner  W.,  Vol.  4:485. 

Roskelley,  Richard,  Vol.  4:414. 

Roskelley,  Samuel,  Vol.  1:400*. 

Ross,  Charles  J.,  Vol.  4:223*. 

Ross,  Isabelle  Salmon,  Vol.  4:296*. 

Rossiter,  Ernest  C,  Vol.  4:336*,  377. 

Rouche,  John  E.,  Vol.  1:434*. 

Rouche,  Thomas  F.,  Vol.  1:464*. 

Roundy,  Elizabeth  J.  D.,  Vol.  1:809*. 

Roundy,  John,  Vol.  4:645. 

Roundy,  Quimby,  Vol.  4:503. 

Roundy,   Shadrach,    Vol.    1:642*;    Vol. 
4:717*. 

Roundy,  Wm.  A.,  Vol.  4:656. 

Rowan,  Chas.  E.,  jun..  Vol.  4:475. 

Rowberry,  John,  Vol.   1:545*. 

Rowe,  Edward  Morris,  Vol.  4:570. 

Rowley,  John  Emerson,  Vol.  4:456. 

Rowley,  John  Thomson,  Vol.  4:439. 

Rowsell,  Arthur  Alvin,  Vol.  4:^80.^^'^^ 

Ruckert,  Christopher  L.,  Vol.  3:706. 

Rudd,  Geo.  Fredrick,  Vol.  4:674. 

Rudy,  Anna  Maria  B.,  Vol.  2:415*. 

Rudy,  Franklin  H.,  Vol.  2:416*. 


Rudy,  Henry,  Vol.  2:414*. 
Rudy,  Josiah  Philip,  Vol.  4:591. 
Rudy,  Margaret  Ann  R.,  Vol.  2:416*. 
Ruegsegger,  Rudolph,  Vol.  4:522. 
Ruff,  George,  Vol.  4:439. 
Rundquist,  Peter  T.,  Vol.  1:592. 
Rushton,   Don   Carlos,   Vol.   4:311. 
Russell,   Allen,   Vol.   3:226*. 
Russell,  Alonzo  Haventon,  Vol.  4:679. 
Russell,  John  Hastie,  Vol.  2:520*. 
Russell,  John  Thomas,  Vol.  4:648. 
Russell,  Jonathan,  Vol.  3:226. 
Russell,  Joseph  Wm.,  Vol.  4:648. 
Russell,  Simeon  A.,  Vol.  4:591, 
Rust,  LeRoy  W.,  Vol.  4:456. 
Ryan,  Geo.  Franklin,  Vol.  4:661. 
Ryckman,  Lloyd  Mason,  Vol.  4:485. 
Rymer,  Sidney  Childers,  Vol.  4:664. 
Rynearson,    Edw.    M.,    Vol.    4:445. 
Rytting,  Chas.  F.,  Vol.  4:472. 


St.  George  Stake,  Vol.  4:591-595. 
St.  Johns  Stake,  Vol.  4:595-598. 
St.  Joseph  Stake,  Vol.  4:598-604. 
Salisbury,  Ellis  Davis,  Vol.  4:656. 
Salisbury,    Elizabeth    Hoskin,   Vol.    4: 

763*. 
Salisbury,  Joseph  G.,  Vol.  4:425. 
Salisbury,  Joseph  H.,  Vol.  2:2*. 
Salisbury,  Joshua,  Vol.  4:763*. 
Salisbury,  Matilda  Jane  Gibbs,  Vol.  4: 

764*. 
Salmon,  John  Faddis,  Vol.  4:633. 
Salmon,  Sumner  Robert,  Vol.  4:633. 
Salter,  Ellen  Cleverly,  Vol.  3:227*. 
Salter,  William,  Vol.  3:227*. 
Salt  Lake  Stake,  Vol.  4:604-606. 
Samoan  Mission,  Vol.  4:366-368. 
Samuelsen,  Frederik  F.,  Vol.  3:707*. 
Samuelson,  Charles,  Vol.  3:503*. 
Sandberg,  Peter  J.,  Vol.  1:446*. 
Sanders,  Carl  August,  Vol.  4:493. 
Sanders,  Martin  F.,  Vol.  4:367. 
Sanders,  Orson,  Vol.  4:445. 
Sanders,  Orson  S.,  Vol.  4:584. 
Sanderson,  Owen  M.,  Vol.  2:249*. 
San  Francisco  Stake,  Vol.  4:606-607. 
San  Juan  Stake,  Vol.  4:607-609. 
San  Luis  Stake,  Vol.  4:609-611. 
Sardoni,  Elizabeth  Thomas,  Vol.  4:264. 
Sargent,  Abel  Morgan,  Vol.  3:228. 
Sargent,  Anna  Christina  Isakson,  Vol. 

4:67. 
Sargent,    George,    Vol.    4:65*. 
Sargent,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:633. 
Sargent,  William,  Vol.  4:634. 
Satterfield,  Ammon  Y.,  Vol.  3:503*. 
Satterthwaite,  Orson  Pratt,  Vol.  4:513. 
Sg,unders,   David,   Vol.  4:584. 
Saunders,  Demas  A.,  Vol.  2:705*. 
Saunders,  Edward  Thos.,  Vol.  4:560. 
Saunders,  Hannah  B.,  Vol.  2:706*. 
Savage,  Charles  Roscoe,  Vol.  3:708*; 
Vol.   4:727. 


812 


INDEX 


Savage,   Geo.   L.,  Vol.   4:727. 
Savage,  Levi  Mathers,  Vol.  4:620. 
Sawley,   Edward,   Vol.   4:634. 
Saxton,  John   Solomon,  Vol.  4:634. 
Saxton,  Matilda  D.,  Vol.  2:707*. 
Saxton,  Solomon,  Vol.  2:706*. 
Saxton,  Wm.  Sherwood,  Vol.  4:634. 
Scandinavian  Mission,  Vol.  4:368-375. 
Schade,  Adam  W.,  Vol.  2:338*. 
Schade,  Christian  F.,  Vol.  2:337*. 
Schaerrer,  John  J.,  Vol.  1:514*;  Vol.  4: 

388. 
Schaub,  Karl  Conrad,  Vol.  3:228*;  Vol. 

4:437. 
Schenk,  John,  Vol.  2:107. 
Schenk,  John  Henry,  Vol.  4:513. 
Schettler,  Bernhard  H.,  Vol.  4:356*. 
Schettler,  Paul  August,  Vol.  4:357*. 
Schmid,  Robert,  Vol.  3:504*. 
Schmutz,   Gottlieb,   Vol.   3:505*. 
Schneider,  Ephraim  C,  Vol.  3:505*. 
Schoenfeld,  Edward,  Vol.  4:388. 
Schoenfeld,  Fred.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:576. 
Schoenfeld,  Jos.   F.,  Vol.  4:391. 
Schofield,  Hyrum  Peter,  Vol.  4:403. 
Schofield,  Jos.  Smith,  Vol.  4:717. 
Schofield,  Nephi  Y.,  Vol.  2:481*. 
Scholes,  Francis,  Vol.  3:229*. 
Scholes,  Frederick,  Vol.  3:230*. 
Scholes,   George,  Vol.  4:717. 
Scholes,  Walter  Adam,  Vol.   4:513. 
Schow,  Anchor  Carlos,  Vol.  4:67*. 
Schow,  Andrew  P.,  Vol.  1:543*. 
Schow,  August  S.,  Vol.  1:767*;  Vol.  4: 

365*. 
Schow,  Michael  Juul,  Vol.  4:430. 
Schramm,  Carl  C,  Vol.  2:158*. 
Schreiner,  Alexander,  Vol.  4:164*. 
Schulthess,    Arnold    H.,    Vol.    1:598*; 

Vol.  4:337*. 
Schwendiman,  Fred,  Vol.  3:506*. 
Schwendiman,  Fred  W.,  Vol.  4:362. 
Schwendiman,  John,  Vol.  4:472. 
Schwieder,  Arthur  Wm.,  Vol.  4:495. 
Schofield,   Richard,   Vol.    4:549. 
Sconberg,  Arthur  H.,  Vol.  4:485. 
Scott,  Andrew  H.,  Vol.  2:7*. 
Scott,  Ernest  Royal,  Vol.  4:489, 
Scott,  Franklin,  Vol.  4:500. 
Scott,  Rulon  S.,  Vol.  4:485. 
Scott,  Walter,  Vol.  2:8*. 
Scott,  William  R.,  Vol.  2:111. 
Scowcroft,  John,  Vol.  3:230*. 
Scowcroft,  Mary  F.,  Vol.  3:231*. 
Scoville,  Alva  Leroy,  Vol.  4:666. 
Seal,  Franklin  E.,  Vol.  2:316*. 
Seaman,   George   Alex.,   Vol.   3:232*. 
Seamons,  James  Wm.,  Vol.  4:437. 
Sears,  William  G.,  Vol.  4:367. 
Secrist,  Charles  Albert,  Vol.  3:232*. 
Secrist,  Jacob  F.,  Vol.  3:711. 
Secrist,  Jacob  Moroni,  Vol.  3:233*. 
Seddon,  Samuel  M.  T.,  Vol.  1:607*. 
Seegmiller,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:166. 
Sederholm,  John  Carlos,  Vol.  4:431. 


Seegmiller,  Frank  K.,  Vol.  4:224. 
Seegmiller,   William   A.,   Vol.   2:707*; 

Vol.  4:377. 
Seegmiller,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:521. 
Seegmiller,  Wm.  West,  Vol.  4:503. 
Seeley,  Joseph  Franklin,  Vol.  3:711. 
Seeley,  William  Stewart,  Vol.  3:507* 
Seeley,  Justin  Burt,  Vol.  4:550. 
Seely,  Arta  McClain,  Vol.  4:449. 
Seely,  Orange.  4:463. 
Selander,  Julius,   Vol.   2:379*. 
Selck,  William  W.,  jun..  Vol.  3:507. 
Sessions,  Byron,  Vol.  1:300*. 
Sessions,  David,  Vol.  2:79*. 
Sessions,  Fabyan  Carter,  jun..  Vol.  3: 

712. 
Sessions,  Harvey,  Vol.  4:442. 
Sessions,  J.  Wyley,  Vol.  4:379. 
Sessions,   Keplar,  Vol.  4:493. 
Severe,  Geo.  Henry,  Vol.  4:442. 
Severson,  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:587. 
Sevey,  Geo.  Thomas,  Vol.  4:501. 
Sevey,  George  W.,  Vol.  1:800. 
Sevier  Stake,  Vol.  4:611-612. 
Seymour,  John  Heber,  Vol.  4:634, 
Shaffer,  James  M.,  Vol.  2:238*. 
Shaffer,  William,  Vol.  4:653. 
Sharon  Stake,  Vol.  4:613-615. 
Sharp,  James,  Vol.  4:519. 
Sharp,  John,  Vol.   1:677*. 
Sharp,  John  C,  Vol.  2:479*. 
Sharp,  John  George,  Vol.  2:327*. 
Sharp,  John  William,  Vol.  2:320*. 
Sharp,  Joseph,  Vol.  2:479. 
Shai-p,  June  Bennion,  Vol.  4:510. 
Sharp,  Sarah  B.  P.,  Vol.  2:480*. 
Shaw,  Austin  H.,  Vol.  4:543. 
Shaw,  James  Edmond,  Vol.  4:560. 
Shaw,  James  Ferguson,  Vol.  4:626. 
Shaw,  James  Leon,  Vol.  4:560. 
Shawcroft,   David  Earl,  Vol.  3:234*. 
Shawcroft,  John  Wm.,  Vol.  4:610. 
Sheets,   Edwin   S.,  Vol.   2:708*. 
Sheets,  Elijah  F.,  Vol.  1:614*. 
Sheffield,  Heber  John,  Vol.  3:234*, 
Shelley,  John  Franklin,  Vol.  4:617. 
Shelley  Stake,  Vol.  4:615-618. 
Shelton,  Francis  Marion,  Vol.  4:456. 
Shepard,  Justin,  Vol.  3:235. 
Shepherd,  Edwin  Tracy,  Vol.  4:403. 
Shepherd,  Joseph  R.,  Vol.  3:235*. 
Shepherd,  Marcus  L.,  Vol.  3:508*. 
Shepherd,   Vincent,   Vol.   4:634. 
Sheppard,  John  Hollister,  jun.,  Vol.  4: 

507. 
Sherman,   Lyman,   Vol.    1:190. 
Sherner,  Lawrence  W.,  Vol.  3:510. 
Sherwood,   Henry   G.,   Vol.  4:717. 
Sherwood,  Robert,  Vol.  2:441*. 
Shields,  Francis  Marion,  Vol.  4:648. 
Shields,  John  Gillespie,  Vol.  3:236*. 
Shields,  Louise  Hansen,  Vol.  3:237*. 
Shill,  Wright  Paynter,  Vol.  4:526. 
Shipley,  Geo.  Dixon,  Vol.  4:453. 
Shipp,  Ellis  R.   (Dr.),  Vol.  4:196, 


INDEX 


813 


Shirley,  Charles  Coulson,  Vol.  3:510. 
Shoemaker,  Abigail  T.,  Vol.  2:560*. 
Shoemaker,   Ezra,   Vol.   2:559*. 
Short,  Ira  Temple,  Vol.  4:531. 
Shorten,  David  Geo.,  Vol.  4:543. 
Shreeve,  Thomas  Arthur,  Vol.  2:708; 

Vol.  4:308. 
Shuldberg,  Wm.  A.,  Vol.  4:565. 
Shumway,  Andrew  P.,  Vol.  4:489,  718. 
Shumway,  Charles,  Vol.  4:718. 
Shumway,  Chas.  Mendon,  Vol.  4:565. 
Shumway,  Ernest  Hill,  Vol.  4:603. 
Shumway,  James  Jardine,  Vol.  4:620. 
Shumway,  James  Lester,  Vol.  4:620. 
Shumway,  Levi   M.,  Vol.  4:620. 
Shumway,  Wallace  Everett,  Vol.  4:620. 
Shumway,  Wm.  Howard,  Vol.  4:620. 
Shumway,  Wilson  A.,  Vol.  2:221. 
Shupe,  James  Wright,  Vol.  2:289*. 
Shurtleff,  Arthur  Thomas,  Vol.  4:480. 
Shurtleff,  John  W.,  Vol.  4:477. 
Shurtliff,  Lewis  W.,  Vol.  1:459*. 
Shurtliff,  Mary  M.  Ballard,  Vol.  4:297. 
Siddoway,  Robert,  Vol.  4:634. 
Sidwell,  Geo.  W.,  Vol.  4:664. 
Siggard,  Peter  Petersen,  Vol.  2:67*. 
Silcock,  Nicholas  Thos.,  Vol.  4:668. 
Silver,  Walter  McAllister,  Vol.  4:765. 
Simmons,  Mary  Ann  F.,  Vol.  3:511*. 
Simmons,  Wallace,  Vol.  4:516. 
Simmons,  William  H.,  Vol.  3:512*. 
Simons,  Martha  Dixon,  Vol.  2:710. 
Simons,   Orrawell,  Vol.  2:709. 
Simper,  Alfred,  Vol.  4:653. 
Simper,  Ernest  Daniel,  Vol.  4:584. 
Simpson,  Henry,  Vol.  4:468. 
Sims,   George,  Vol.  3:712*. 
Sinclair,  David  Raymond,  Vol.  4:642. 
Sinclair,  Wm.  A.  H.,  Vol.  4:425. 
Sirrine,  J.  Warren,  Vol.  4:535. 
Sirrine,   Mephibosheth,   Vol.  3:713., 
Sjodahl,  Janne  Mattson,  Vol.  3:714*. 
Skanchy,  Anthon  L.,  Vol.  1:422*;  Vol. 

4:373*. 
Skeem,   Marcus,  Vol.   4:453. 
Skeen,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:557. 
Skidmore,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  3:237*. 
Skidmore,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:176*. 
Skidmore,  William  L.,  Vol.  1:403*. 
Skinner,  Clawson  Nephi,  Vol.  4:485. 
Skinner,  George,  Vol.  3:238*. 
Skinner,  Nephi  Aaron,  Vol.  3:513. 
Skinner,  William  H.,  Vol.  3:513. 
Skousen,  Orson  Pratt,  Vol.  4:603. 
Slack,  Walter  Herbert,  Vol.  3:513. 
Slade,  Abram  B.,  Vol.  4:677. 
Slater,  Enos  Arnold,  Vol.  4:557. 
Slater,  James  Alma,  Vol.  4:557. 
Slaugh,   George   Alfred,  Vol.  2:239*. 
Sloan,  James,  Vol.  1 :254. 
Sloan,  John   Samuel,  Vol.  4:490. 
Sloan,  Walter  Reed,  Vol.  4:364. 
Sloan,  William  R.,  Vol.  4:394,  514. 
Sly,  James  Calvin,  Vol.  3:514. 
Smart,  Abel,  Vol.  2:32*. 


Smart,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  1:589*. 
Smart,  Thomas   S.,  Vol.  3:514*. 
Smart,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:360*;  Vol. 

4:333*. 
Smith,  Adam  Gibson,  Vol.  4:442. 
Smith,  Albert,  Vol.  2:306*. 
Smith,  Albert  Edward,  Vol.  4:498. 
Smith,  Albert  Ricks,  Vol.  4:610. 
Smith,  Alice  Kimball,  Vol.  4:265. 
Smith,  Alma  Fitzgerald,  Vol.  4:458. 
Smith,  Alma  Lamoni,  Vol.  4:341. 
Smith,  Alvin  Nathaniel,  Vol.  3:715. 
Smith,  Amanda,  Vol.  2:792. 
Smith,  Andrew,  Vol.   1:599*. 
Smith,  Andrew,  jun.,  Vol.  1:602*;  Vol. 

4:311*. 
Smith,  Arthur  Bennion,  Vol.  4:626. 
Smith,  Asahel,  Vol.  1:182. 
Smith,  Asahel  Henry,  Vol.  4:598. 
Smith,  Azariah,  Vol.  2:224. 
Smith,  Bathsheba  W.,  Vol.  1:699*;  Vol. 

4:178*,  196. 
Smith,  Benjamin  F.,  Vol.  1:497*. 
Smith,  Charles,  jun..  Vol.  4:531. 
Smith,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  3:516*;  Vol.  4: 

434. 
Smith,  Charles  Leo,  Vol.  4:531. 
Smith,  Charles  N.,  Vol.  4:680. 
Smith,  Charles  Wm.,  Vol.  4:456. 
Smith,  Cordia  Hendrikson,  Vol.  4:297. 
Smith,  David  Asahel,  Vol.  3:775*;  Vol. 

4:224*. 
Smith,  Edna  Lambson,  Vol.  4:298. 
Smith,  Elias,  Vol.  1:719*. 
Smith,  Elias  A.,  Vol.   1:776*;  Vol.  4: 

61*. 
Smith,  Elias  Wesley,  Vol.  4:341, 
Smith,  Elmer  Wilding,  Vol.  4:399. 
Smith,  Emma  Hale,  Vol.  1:692*;  Vol. 

4:178*,  196*. 
Smith,  Ethel  Reynolds,  Vol.  4:197. 
Smith,  George  A.,  Vol.  1:37*;  Vol.  4: 

718. 
Smith,  George  A.,  jun..  Vol.  2:392*. 
Smith,    George    Albert,    Vol.    3:776*; 

Vol.  4:246,  318*. 
Smith,  Geo.  Alfred,  Vol.  4:510. 
Smith,  Geo.  F.,  Vol.  4:425. 
Smith,  Geo.  Henry,  Vol.  4:421. 
Smith,  George  Michael,  Vol.  3:239*. 
Smith,  Geo.  Usher,  Vol.  4:473. 
Smith,  Geo.   Y.,  jun.,  VoL  4:415. 
Smith,  Gertrude  Pearson,  Vol.  4:298. 
Smith,  Harriet  S.,  Vol.  2:298. 
Smith,  Henry  W.,  Vol.  4:674. 
Smith,  Herald  Eugene,  Vol.  3:715. 
Smith,  Hyrum  (Taylor  Stake),  Vol.  3: 

240*. 
Smith,  Hyrum  (Patriarch),  VoL  1:52*. 
Smith,  Hyrum  Gibbs,  Vol.  3:778*;  Vol. 

4:246,  686*. 
Smith,  Hyrum  Joseph,  Vol.  4:510. 
Smith,  Hyrum  Leroy,  Vol.  4:603. 
Smith,  Hyrum  M.,  Vol.  1:772*;  VoL  3: 

779*;  VoL  4:246,  318*. 


814 


INDEX 


Smith,  Ida  E.  Bowman,  Vol.  4:298. 
Smith,  Isaac,  Vol.  1:410*. 
Smith,  James  Martin,  Vol.  4:603. 
Smith,  James  Raymond,  Vol.  4:473. 
Smith,  Jesse  N.,  Vol.  1:316*;  Vol.  4 

373*. 
Smith,  John    (5th  Patriarch),  Vol.   1 

182 
Smith,  John   (6th  Patriarch),  Vol.  1 

183*;  Vol.  3:780. 
Smith,  John  C.  L.,  Vol.  1:532. 
Smith,  John  Eddins,  Vol.  2:297*. 
Smith,  John  Fewson,  Vol.  1:688*. 
Smith,  John  Henry,  Vol.  1:141*;  Vol. 

3:780;  Vol.  4:246,  319*. 
Smith,  John  Jex,  Vol.  3:242*. 
Smith,  John  Lyman,  Vol.  4:388. 
Smith,  John  S.,  Vol.  4:645. 
Smith,  John  Sivel,  Vol.  3:241. 
Smith,  Joseph,  jun..  Vol.  1:1*. 
Smith,  Joseph,  sen.,  Vol.  1:181. 
Smith,  Joseph  Daniel,  Vol.  2:143*. 
Smith,  Joseph  Ernest,  Vol.  4:166. 
Smith,    Joseph    Fielding,    Vol.    1:66*; 

Vol.  3:781;  Vol.  4:246,  319*,  341. 
-Smith,  Joseph   Fielding,  jun.,  Vol.   3: 
784*;  Vol.  4:246,  686*. 
Smith,  Joseph  F.  Ill,  Vol.  4:246*. 
Smith,  Joseph  Harmon,  Vol.  2:383*. 
Smith,  Joseph  West,  Vol.  2:220*. 

Smith,  Josephine  A.  R.,  Vol.  2:307*. 

Smith,  Josephine  G.,  Vol.  4:298. 

Smith,  Julina  L.,  Vol.  4:68*,  197. 

Smith,   Lauritz,  Vol.   1:573*. 

Smith,  LeGrand  Fitzgerald,  Vol.  4:570. 

Smith,  Lot,  Vol.  1:803*. 

Smith,  Lucy,  Vol.   1:690*. 

Smith,  Lucy  Woodruff,  Vol.  4:265. 

Smith,  Martha  Gee,  Vol.  4:265. 

Smith,  Mary  Ellen  W.,  Vol.  3:240*. 

Smith,  Mary  Fielding,  Vol.  2:710. 

Smith,  Nephi  Lot,  Vol.  4:603. 

Smith,  Nicholas  G.,  Vol.  4:167*,  379. 

Smith,  Octavius,  Vol.  4:642. 

Smith,  Orson,  Vol.  1:407*. 

Smith,  Ralph,  Vol.  2:73*. 

Smith,  Richard  H.,  Vol.  4:473. 

Smith,  Ruth  Pingree,  Vol.  4:299. 

Smith,  Samuel  F.,  Vol.  2:214*. 

Smith,  Samuel  H.,  Vol.  1:278. 

Smith,  Samuel  H.  B.,  Vol.  3:242*. 

Smith,  Silas,  Vol.  4:341. 

Smith,  Silas  S.,  Vol.  1:801*. 

Smith,  Simon  Long,  Vol.  4:415. 

Smith,  Sylvester,  Vol.  1:191. 

Smith,  Thomas  Alfred,  Vol.  3:516*. 

Smith,  Thomas  Sasson,  Vol.  4:675. 

Smith,  Thomas  X.,  Vol.  2:77*. 

Smith,  Warren  Barnes,  Vol.  3:715. 

Smith,  Willard  Gilbert,  Vol.  1:473. 

Smith,  Willard  Gilbert  (Cherry  Creek 
Ward),  Vol.  3:517. 

Smith,  Willard  Gilbert  (Leavitt),  Vol. 

4:395. 
Smith,  Willard  Lisbon,  Vol.  4:367,  390. 


Smith,  Willard  Richards,  Vol.  4:449. 
Smith,  William,  Vol.  1:86;  Vol.  4:  332. 
Smith,  William  B.,  Vol.  3:244*. 
Smith,  William  Cooke,  Vol.  3:517. 
Smith,  William  Henry,  Vol.  2:297*. 
Smith,  William  J.,  Vol.  1:472. 
Smith,  William  Reed,  Vol.  1:802. 
Smith,  William  Richard,  Vol.  4:62*. 
Smith,  Winslow  Farr,  Vol.  4:362. 
Smoot,  Abraham  O.,  Vol.   1:485*. 
Smoot,  Alice  T.  Sheets,  Vol.  4:299. 
Smoot,  Brigham,  Vol.  4:390. 
Smoot,  Geo.  Morrison,  Vol.  4:614. 
Smoot,  Reed,  Vol.  1:178*;  Vol.  4:247. 
Smoot,  William  C.  A.,  Vol.  2:711*;  Vol. 

4:719.  j 

Smuin,  George,  Vol.  2:290< 
Snedaker,  Jedediah  Leroy,  Vol.  4:473. 
Snelgrove,  Chas.  Rich,  Vol.  4:477. 
Snell,  Geo.  Dixon,  Vol.  4:570. 
Snell,  Rufus  P.,  Vol.  2:45. 
Snow,  Edward  H.,  Vol.  1:798*;  Vol.  4: 

333*. 
Snow,  Edwin  Marion,  Vol.  4:505. 
Snow,   Eliza  R.,  Vol.   1:693*;   Vol.  4: 

178*    197* 
Snow,  Elizabeth  R.  A.,  Vol.  2:512*. 
Snow,    Erastus,   Vol.    1:103*;    Vol.   4: 

373*    719 
Snow,  Frank  Mousley,  Vol.  3:518*. 
Snow,  Franklin  R.,  Vol.  3:518*. 
Snow,  James  C,  Vol.  1:794*. 
Snow,  Jeter,  Vol.  1:539. 
Snow,  Joseph  Homer,  Vol.  2:183*. 
Snow,  Karl  Nelson,  Vol.  4:594. 
Snow,    LeRoi    Clarence,    Vol.    3:716*; 

Vol.  4:247. 
Snow,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  1:26*;  Vol.  3:786; 

Vol.  4:247,  341*,  345. 
Snow,  Lucius  A.,  Vol.  2:60*. 
Snow,  Mason  Levi,  Vol.  2:93. 

Snow,  Minerva  White,  Vol.  4:197. 

Snow,  Minnie  Jensen,  Vol.  4:266. 

Snow,  Minnie  Loveland,  Vol.  4:299. 

Snow,  Moroni,  Vol.  4:70*,  247. 

Snow,   Oliver  G.,  Vol.   1:389;   Vol.   2: 
58* 

Snow,  Orrin  Henry,  Vol.  3:244*;  VoL 
4:547. 

Snow,  Perry  Edward,  Vol.  4:463. 

Snow,  Seymour  B.,  Vol.  2:797*. 

Snow,  Willard,  Vol.  4:374*. 

Snow,  Willard  L.,  Vol.  1:574*. 

Snow,  William,  Vol.  3:519*. 

Snow,  Zerubbabel,  Vol.  4:691. 

Snowball,  John,  Vol.  2:257*. 

Snowflake  Stake,  Vol.  4:618-621. 

Snyder,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:422. 

Society  Islands  Mission,  Vol.  4:375-377. 

Soderberg,  Oscar  W.,  Vol.  4:383. 

Soderborg,  Geo.  H.,  Vol.  4:480. 

Solomon,  Alfred,  Vol.  1:681*;  Vol.  4: 
319*. 

Solomonson,  Solomon  Olin,  Vol.  4:456. 

Sorensen,  Alden  Conrad,  Vol.  3:717. 


INDEX 


815 


Sorensen,  Ammon  Ambrose,  Vol.  4:449. 
Sorensen,  Andrew  P.,  Vol.  2:205. 
Sorensen,  Christian  W.,  Vol.  4:168*. 
Sorensen,  Christine  W.,  Vol.  2:712*. 
Sorensen,   Donna   Durant,   Vol.   4:198. 
Sorensen,  Elick  Jos.,  Vol.  4:485. 
Sorensen,  Hans  C,  Vol.  3:717*. 
Sorensen,  Henry  Chas.,  Vol.  4:490. 
Sorensen,  James  Elmer,  Vol.  4:612. 
Sorensen,  John  C,  Vol.  4:399. 
Sorensen,  John  P.,  Vol.  1:819*. 
Sorensen,  Joseph  N.,  Vol.  4:584. 
Sorensen,  Lars,  Vol.  4:617. 
Sorensen,  Levi,  Vol.  4:553. 
Sorensen,  Martin  Ezra,  Vol.  4:399. 
Sorensen,   Morton,  Vol.  2:712*. 
Sorensen,  Niels,  Vol.  2:269. 
Sorensen,   Ole,   Vol.    1:523*. 
Sorensen,  Orion  Genial,  Vol.  4:482. 
Sorensen,  Peter,  Vol.  3:520. 
Sorensen,  Peter  C,  Vol.  2:713. 
Sorensen,  Peter  Marlin,  Vol.  4:482. 
Sorensen,  Wilford  H.,  Vol.  4:581. 
Sorensen,  Willard   H.,   Vol.   4:518. 
Sorenson,  Soren  Christian,  Vol.  4:526. 
South  African  Mission,  Vol.  4:378-379. 
South  American   Mission,  Vol.  4:379- 

380. 
South  Davis  Stake,  Vol.  4:621-622. 
South  Sanpete   Stake,  Vol.  4:622-624. 
South   Sevier   Stake,    Vol.   4:624-627. 
Southern   States   Mission,   Vol.   4:380- 

382. 
Southwestern   States  Mission,  Vol.  4: 

382. 
Southwick,  John  Alfred,  Vol.  3:718. 
Spackman,  Hazen  Merlin,  Vol.  4:415. 
Spafford,  Belle  Smith,  Vol.  4:198. 
Spaulding,  Ira  N.,  Vol.  4:543. 
Speirs,  Adam,  Vol.  1:618*. 
Spencer,  Daniel,  Vol.  1:286*. 
Spencer,  Franklin,  Vol.  1:519. 
Spencer,   Geo.   Boardman,   Vol.   4:403. 
Spencer,  Geo.  S.,  Vol.  4:357*,  478. 
Spencer,   Hiram   Theron,   Vol.   2:443*. 
Spencer,  Howard  O.,  Vol.  4:503. 
Spencer,  John,  Vol.  4:550. 
Spencer,   Mary   Barr  Y.,  Vol.   2:444*. 
Spencer,   Orson,  Vol.   1:337*;   Vol.   4: 

319*. 
Spencer,  Samuel  Geo.,  Vol.  4:363. 
Spendlove,  Jos.  Franklin,  Vol.  4:540. 
Sperry,  Charles,  Vol.  4:498. 
Sperry,  Harrison,  Vol.  1:605*. 
Sperry,  Lucy  Emma  Gedge,  Vol.  4:225. 
Spiers,   Willard   W.   M.,  Vol.  4:675. 
Spilsbury,  Archie  Price,  Vol.  4:680. 
Spilsbury,  Fanny  S.,  Vol.  3:246*. 
Spilsbury,  George,  Vol.  3:245*. 
Spongberg,  Virgil   H.,  Vol.  4:516. 
Spori,  Jacob,  Vol.  4:391. 
Sprague,  Samuel  Lindsay,  Vol.  4:374. 
Sproul,  Andrew,  Vol.  4:595. 
Spry,  William,  Vol.  4:381. 
Staines,  Lillias  T.  L.,  Vol.  2:518*. 


Staines,  William  C,  Vol.  2:513*. 
Staker,  C.   M.  P.,  Vol.  2:293*. 
Staker,  Joseph   Smith,  Vol.  2:715*. 
Staker,   Nathan   Henry,  Vol.   2:294. 
Staker,  William   Henry,  Vol.  2:292*. 
Staley,  John  Wesley,  Vol.  3:521. 
Stallings,  Virgil  B.,  Vol.  2:335*;  Vol. 

4:561. 
Standifird,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:620. 
Standing,  James,  Vol.  2:713. 
Standing,  James  V.,  Vol.  2:714*. 
Standing,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:719. 
Standring,  Rebecca  E.,  Vol.  4:198. 
Stanger,  Albert  Edw.,  Vol.  4:495. 
Stanger,  Alfred  J.,  Vol.  4:495. 
Stanger,  George  O.,  Vol.  3:721. 
Stanley,  Frank,  Vol.  2:451*. 
Stanley,  Geo.  Burton,  Vol.  4:661. 
Staples,   John.  Wm.,   Vol.   4:634. 
Staples,  Joseph   Levi,  Vol.  2:714*. 
Stapley,  Orley  S.,  Vol.  3:521*. 
Stapley,   Wm.   Berry,   Vol.   4:439. 
Star  Valley   Stake,   Vol.  4:627-630. 
Stauffer,  Frederick,  Vol.  4:391. 
Stayner,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  4:363. 
Steed,  Henry  Lee,  Vol.  4:379. 
Steed,  Joseph  Evan,  Vol.  4:395. 
Steed,  Laura  L.  Reed,  Vol.  3:247*. 
Steed,    Susannah    Davis,   Vol.   3:249*. 
Steed,  Thos.,  Vol.  2:88*;   Vol.  3:247*. 
Steed,   Thomas   Joseph,   Vol.   3:248*. 
Steed,  Walter  Wm.,  Vol.  3:250*. 
Steedman,  Andrew,  Vol.  3:522*. 
Steele,  James  E.,  Vol.  1:453*. 
Steele,  Mahonri   M.,  Vol.   1:543,  821*. 
Steiner,  Casper,  Vol.  4:473. 
Steiner,  John  Ernest,  Vol.  4:434,  501. 
Stelter,  Carl  L.  F.,  Vol.  4:765. 
Stenhouse,  Thomas  B.  H.,  Vol.  4:385. 
Stephens,  Amos  R.,  Vol.  4:425. 
Stephens,  Clarence  Lee,  Vol.  4:642. 
Stephens,   Evan,   Vol.   1:740*;   Vol.  4: 

247. 
Stephens,  Parley  Robt.,  Vol.  4:634. 
Stephens,  William  Orial,  Vol.  3:523*. 
Stephenson,   Anthony,   Vol.   1:530*. 
Stephenson,   Anthony    E.,    Vol.   4:453. 
Stephenson,  Daniel  P.,  Vol.  4:581. 
Sterrett,  William  W.,  Vol.  3:523. 
Stevens,  David  Riley,  Vol.  3:251*. 
Stevens,  George  W.,  Vol.  3:721. 
Stevens,  Joseph  F.,  Vol.  3:525*. 
Stevens,  Margery,  Vol.  3:721. 
Stevens,  Ransom  M.,  Vol.  3:722;  Vol. 

4:367. 
Stevens,  Roswell,  Vol.  4:719. 
Stevens,    Stringham    A.,    Vol.    4:247*, 

510. 
Stevens,  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  2:248*. 
Stevens,  Walter,  Vol.  2:715. 
Stevensen,  Willard  E.,  Vol.  2:716*. 
Stevenson,  Edward,  Vol.  1:214*. 
Stevenson,  Elizabeth  Jane  DuFresne, 

Vol.  2:716*;  Vol.  4:198. 
Stevenson,  Eliza  M.  S.,  Vol.  3:252*. 


816 


INDEX 


Stevenson,  Ezra  T.,  Vol.  2:500*;  Vol. 

4:361*. 
Stevenson,  George  V.,  Vol.  3:251*. 
Stevenson,  Lester  A.,  Vol.  4:248. 
Stewart,  Andrew  J.,  Vol.  4:308. 
Stewart,  Andrew  J.  B.,  Vol.  4:545. 
Stewart,   Benjamin   Franklin,   Vol.   2: 

717*;  Vol.  4:719. 
Stewart,  Daniel  Jones,  Vol.  3:722. 
Stewart,  David  B.,  Vol.  1:541. 
Stewart,   Elizabeth   H.,   Vol.   2:575*. 
Stewart,  Ella  M.  Nebeker,  Vol.  4:299. 
Stewart,  Emily  Smith,  Vol.  4:300. 
Stewart,  Grace  Nixon,  Vol.  4:266. 
Stewart,  Isaac  M.,  Vol.  1:793*. 
Stewart,  James,  Vol.  2:574*. 
Stewart,  James  W.   (Milbui'n  Ward), 

Vol.  2:579. 
Stewart,  James  W.  (original  pioneer). 

Vol.  4:719. 
Stewart,  James  Z.,  Vol.   1:416*;   Vol. 

4:348. 
Stewart,  John  Riley,  Vol.  3:525. 
Stewart,  Joseph  Alvin,  Vol.  3:526. 
Stewart,  Melbourne  Clair,  Vol.  4:486. 
Stewart,  Neil  Murdock,  Vol.  3:722*. 
Stewart,  Randolph  H.,  Vol.  4:609. 
Stewart,   Samuel  W.,  Vol.   1:786*. 
Stewart,   S.   Charlotte,   Vol.   4:266. 
Stewart,  Urban  Van,  Vol.  3:526*. 
Stewart,  Vincent  I.,  Vol.  2:21*. 
Stewart,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:184*;  Vol. 

4:626. 
Stewart,  Wm.  Lyle,  Vol.  4:557. 
Stewart,  William  M.,  Vol.   1:786*. 
Stewart,  Wm.  Thomas,  Vol.  4:309. 
Stewart,  Wm.  Urban,  Vol.  4:411. 

Stimpson,  John,  Vol.  4:62. 

Stimpson,  Joseph  H.,  Vol  4:71*,  346. 

Stimpson,  WiUiam,  Vol.  2:253*. 

Stirling,  David,  Vol.  4:595. 

Stock,  John,  Vol.  4:404. 

Stock,  John  Wm.  E.,  Vol.  4:404. 

Stocking,  Ensign  I.,  Vol.  2:718*. 

Stocking,  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:668. 

Stoddard,  Alex.  Lester,  Vol.  4:656. 

Stoddard,  Geo.  Eckersley,  Vol.  4:63*. 

Stoddard,   Hyrum   F.,  Vol.  4:543. 

Stoddard,  Joseph  D.,  Vol.  3:527. 

Stoddard,  Wm.   E.,  Vol.   4:425. 

Stoddard,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:581. 

Stohl,  David  Oscar,  Vol.  4:486. 

Stohl,   Lorenzo   N.,   Vol.   2:65*. 

Stohl,  Ole  N.,  Vol.  1:394*. 

Stohl,  Oleen  Nilson,  Vol.  3:528*. 

Stoker,  David,  Vol.  3:253*. 

Stoker,  David,  jun..  Vol.  3:254*. 

Stoker,    John    (Bp.    East    Bountiful), 
Vol.  3:252. 

Stoker,   John    (Bp.    Lehi   4th    Ward), 
Vol.  3:723*. 

Stoker,  Regena  H.,  Vol.  3:253*. 

Stoker,  Wm.  E.,  Vol.  4:439. 

Stokes,  Archie,  Vol.  4:434. 

Stokes,  Joseph  M.,  Vol.  4:407. 


Stokes,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:299. 
Stolworthy,  Jesse   Henry,  Vol.  4:677. 
Stolworthy,  Willard  Chase,  Vol.  4:677. 
Stone,  David  Augustin,  Vol.  4:422. 
Stone,  David  Lehi,  Vol.  4:523. 
Stone,  Joseph  Oliver,  Vol.  4:614. 
Stoney,  John  Henry,  Vol.  4:475. 
Stoof,  K.  B.  Reinhold,  Vol.  4:380. 
Stookey,  Mahonri  M.,  Vol.  4:648. 
Storrs,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:529. 
Stott,  Chas.  Orval,  Vol.  4:624. 
Stott,  Edwin,  Vol.  3:530. 
Stott,  James  Willie,  Vol.  4:642. 
Stott,  Joseph  Leo,  Vol.  4:529. 
Stout,  David  Fisk,  Vol.  4:363. 
Stout,  Hosea,  Vol.  3:530*. 
Stowell,  Heber  John,  Vol.  4:439. 
Stratford,  Edwin,  Vol.  2:291*. 
Stratton,  Chas.  Abel,  Vol.  4:453. 
Street,  Edwin  W.,  Vol.  3:728. 
Stringham,  Briant,  Vol.  4:720. 
Stringham,  Henry,  Vol.  4:510. 
Stringham,  Jedediah,   Vol.  4:622. 
Stringham,  Lucy  L.  F.,  Vol.  4:300. 
Stringham,  Richard,  Vol.  4:622. 
Strong,  Alice  F.  B.  W.,  Vol.  3:255*. 
Stuart,  David  Calvin,  Vol.  4:666. 
Stuart,  George,  Vol.  4:523. 
Stuart,  William  C,  Vol.  4:578. 
Stucki,  Ezra  Spori,  Vol.  4:404. 
Stucki,  Gottfried,  Vol.  4:495. 
Stucki,  John  Ulrich,  Vol.  2:29*;   Vol. 

4:388. 
Stutznegger,  Conrad,  Vol.  4:606. 
Stutznegger,  John  C,  Vol.  4:618. 
Styler,  John,  Vol.  4:453. 
Sudbury,   Samuel  John,  Vol.   2:280*. 
Sudweeks,  Henry,  Vol.  4:475. 
Sudweeks,  Jos.  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:650. 
Sullivan,  James  Henry,  Vol.  2:718*. 
Summe,  Gilbard,  Vol.  4:720. 

Summerhays,  Caleb  E.,  Vol.  4:176*. 

Summerhays,  Ellen  L.  B.,  Vol.  4:177. 

Summerhays,   Florence,   Vol.   4:301. 

Summerhays,  Jos.  Wm.,  Vol.  4:64*. 

Summerhays,    Margaret,    Vol.   4:266. 

Summerhays,  Richard  B.,  Vol.  4:686. 

Summit  Stake,  Vol.  4:630-635. 

Sundwall,  Peter,  Vol.  3:724*;  Vol.  4: 
374*,  384. 

Sutton,  David  J.,  Vol.  4:578. 

Sutton,   Harry  Edward,  Vol.  3:254*. 

Swalberg,   Ernest   L.,  Vol.  3:534*. 

Swallow,  Richard  Thomas,  Vol.  4:547. 

Swapp,  Joseph  Henry,  Vol.  3:255*. 

Swapp,  William,  Vol.  4:598. 

Swedish   Mission,  Vol.  4:382-384. 

Sweeten,   Warren   Hugh,   Vol.  4:449. 

Swensen,  Severin,  Vol.  4:675. 

Swenson,  Canute,  Vol.  2:719*. 

Swenson,  Oscar  E.,  Vol.  2:467*. 

Swenson,  Russell  B.,  Vol.  4:680. 

Swenson,  Swen  L.,  Vol.  3:257*. 

Swift,  Sarah  Walsh,  Vol.  3:256*. 

Swindle,  Heber,  Vol.  2:798*. 


INDEX 


817 


Swiss  Mission,  Vol.  4:384-386. 

Swiss    and    German    Mission,    Vol.    4: 

386-389. 
Swiss  and  Italian  Mission,  Vol.  4:386. 
Sylvester,  Joshua  Wm.,  Vol.  4:626. 
Symons,  Arzelia  W.,  Vol.  3:535. 


Tadje,  Erederick,  Vol.  4:388*. 
Taft,  Seth,  Vol.  2:798-;  Vol.  4:720. 
Taggart,  Geo.  Albert,  Vol.  4:540. 
Taggart,  Henry  Milton,  Vol.  4:478. 
Tahitian      Mission      (See      Society 

Islands),  Vol.  4:389. 
Talmage,  James  Edward,  Vol.  3:787*; 

Vol.  4:248,  320*. 
Talmage,  May  Booth,  Vol.  4:266. 
Talmage,  Nelle  Allen,  Vol.  4:301. 
Tanner,  Benjamin  F.,  Vol.  2:58. 
Tanner,  Ebenezer,  jun..  Vol.  4:411. 
Tanner,  Geo.  Leroy,  Vol.  4:468. 
Tanner,  Geo.   Shepherd,  Vol.  4:473. 
Tanner,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:720*. 
Tanner,  Henry  S.,.  Vol.  1:717*;  Vol,  4: 

248,  323*. 
Tanner,  Jacob  Thomas,  Vol.  4:411. 
Tanner,  James  Henry,  Vol.  4:395. 
Tanner,  John,  Vol.  2:799. 
Tanner,  John  Alma,  Vol.  3:535*. 
Tanner,  John  J.,  Vol.  2:156,  811*. 
Tanner,  Joseph  M.,  Vol.  1:709*. 
Tanner,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  2:153*. 
Tanner,  Myron,  Vol.  4:658. 
Tanner,  Nathan,  Vol.  4:691. 
Tanner,  Nathan,  jun..  Vol.  3:536*. 
Tanner,  Nathan  A.,  Vol.  2:246*. 
Tanner,   Nathan   Wm.,   Vol.   4:395. 
Tanner,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:720. 
Tanner,  William  S.,  Vol.  2:151. 
Tate,  Alma  Vining,  Vol.  4:603. 
Taylor,  Alma  O.,  Vol.  4:346. 
Taylor,  Alonzo  L.,  Vol.  2:122*. 
Taylor,  David  R.,  Vol.  4:570. 
Taylor,  Edmund  Z.,  Vol.  3:724. 
Taylor,  Eliza  J.  W.,  Vol.  2:449*. 
Taylor,   Elmer,  Vol.  3:537*. 
Taylor,  Elmer  Franklin,  Vol.  4:677. 
Taylor,  Elmina  Shepherd,  Vol.  4:267*. 
Taylor,  Frances  K.  T.,  Vol.  4:301. 
Taylor,  Frank  Y.,  Vol.  1:563*;  Vol.  4: 

248. 
Taylor,  George  B.,  Vol.  3:725.- 
Taylor,   George   H.,  Vol.   1:634*^ 
Taylor,  Geo.  Harris,  Vol.  4:645. 
Taylor,  Geo.  S.,  Vol.  4:362. 
Taylor,  Hiram  Martin,  Vol.  4:677. 
Taylor,  James  Calvin,  Vol.  4:664. 
Taylor,  James   Daniel,  Vol.  4:565. 
Taylor,  James  Elmer,  Vol.  3:537;  Vol. 

4:499. 
Taylor,   James    Green,   Vol.   3:538. 
Taylor,  James  Milton,  Vol.  4:453. 
Taylor,  Jared,   Vol.   4:627. 
Taylor,  Jesse  Soar,  Vol.  4:545. 

Vol.   IV,  No.   52 


Taylor,  John   (Pres.  of  Church),  Vol. 

1:14*;  Vol.  4:333,  336. 
Taylor,   John    (Tooele),   Vol.   2:720*. 
Taylor,  John   (Bp.  Pima  Ward),  Vol. 

4:604. 
Taylor,  John  Harris,  Vol.  4:72*,  248*, 

363. 
Taylor,  John  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:463. 
Taylor,  John  Possels,  Vol.  3:258. 
Taylor,  John   Whitaker,   Vol.    1:151*; 

Vol.  3:789;  Vol.  4:325*. 
Taylor,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  1:295*. 
Taylor,    Jos.    Elmer     (Bp.    Harmony 

Ward),  Vol.   4:573. 
Taylor,  Joseph  Harris,  Vol.  3:725. 
Taylor,  Joseph  Lake,  Vol.  3:538, 
Taylor,  Lee,  Vol.  2:579. 
Taylor,  Lee  Raymond,  Vol.  4:545. 
Taylor,   Leo   Sanford,  Vol.  3:539. 
Taylor,  Levi  James,  Vol.  2:270*. 
Taylor,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:557. 
Taylor,  Lorenzo  J.,  Vol,  4:664, 
Taylor,   Margaret  Young,  Vol.  4:267. 
Taylor,  Martin  V.  B.,  Vol.  2:578*. 
Taylor,  Moses   W.,  Vol.  4:73*,  248. 
Taylor,   Nellie   Colebrook,   Vol,   4:267. 
Taylor,   Norman,  Vol.   4:720, 
Taylor,  Pleasant  Green,  Vol.  4:557, 
Taylor,   Rachel   Grant,  Vol.   4:268. 
Taylor,  Robt.  Allen,  Vol.  4:664. 
Taylor,  Roy,  Vol.  4:653. 
Taylor,  Samuel   B.,  Vol.  2:449*. 
Taylor,  Samuel  E,,  Vol.  4:545. 
Taylor,  Stanley  F.,  Vol.  4:727. 
Taylor,  Thomas   (Bp.  S.  L.  City  14th 

Ward),  Vol.  2:366*. 
Taylor,  Thomas  (Bp.  Elba  Ward),  Vol. 

4:584. 
Taylor,  Thomas,  jun..  Vol.  4:584. 
Taylor,  Thomas  E.,  Vol.  2:720*. 
Taylor,  Thomas  H.,  Vol.  1:493*. 
Taylor,  Thomas  Nicholls,  Vol.  3:725*. 
Taylor,   William    (of   Granite   Stake), 

Vol..  1:564. 
Taylor,   William    (Bp.   Ferron  Ward), 

Vol.  4:463.' 
Taylor,  William  A.,  Vol,  3:259*. 
Taylor,  Wm.  B.,  Vol.  4:618. 
Taylor,  Wm.  Jesse,  Vol.  4:545. 
Taylor,  Wm.  Weldon,  Vol.  4:311,  614. 
Taylor,  Wm.  Whittaker,  Vol.  1:199. 
Taylor    Stake,    Vol.    4:635-636. 
Taysom,  Gilbert,  Vol.  4:629. 
Teasdale,  George,  Vol.  1:144*;  Vol  3: 

790;  Vol.  4:320*,  345. 
Teasdale,  Letitia  Thomas,  Vol.  4:268. 
Teeples,  Henry  Alanson,  Vol.  4:612. 
Teeples,   William   R.,  Vol.   3:259*. 
Telford,  John  Witt,  Vol.  4:495. 
Tempest,  Phineus,  Vol.  4:349. 
Tenney,  Amnion  M.,  Vol.  4:348. 
Tenney,  Warren  Moroni,  Vol.  4:598. 
Terry,  Chas.  A.,  Vol.  4:595. 
Terry,  James  Parshall,  Vol,  3:260*. 
Terry,  Joseph,  Vol,  1:572. 

December  26,   1936 


818 


INDEX 


Terry,  Joshua,  Vol.  1:572*. 
Terry,  Otis  L.,  Vol.  2:802*. 
Terry,  Otis  L.,  jun..  Vol.  2:804*. 
Terry,  Thomas   Searles,  Vol.  3:261*. 
Terry,  Timothy  Peter,  Vol.  4:558. 
Terry,  Wm.  Z.,  Vol.  4:543,  634. 
Terry,  Zera  Pulsipher,  Vol.  4:587. 
Teton  Stake,  Vol.  4:637-642. 
Teuscher,  Henry,  jun..  Vol.  3:539. 
Tew,  Warren  S.,  Vol.  4:518. 
Tew,  William,  Vol.  1:495. 
Thackeray,  George  R.,  Vol.  3:263*. 
Thalman,  Albert  Verge,  Vol.  4:553. 
Thatcher,  Brigham  Guy,  Vol.  4:357*, 

514. 
Thatcher,  Fanny  Young,  Vol.  4:268. 
Thatcher,  Gilbert,  Vol.  4:558. 
Thatcher,  Henry  K.,  Vol.  3:264*. 
Thatcher,  Howard  E.,  Vol.  4:399. 
Thatcher,  John   B.,   Vol.   3:263*. 
Thatcher,  John  B.,  jun..  Vol.  4:629. 
Thatcher,  Moses,  Vol.  1:127*;  Vol.  3: 

791;   Vol.  4:348*. 
Thatcher,  Nathan  Davis,  Vol.  4:400. 
Thayne,  Edgar  Hunt,  Vol.  4:439. 
Theddell,   Emil   Conrad,  Vol.   3:726. 
Theurer,  Frederich,  Vol.  4:514. 
Thomander,  Daniel  Theo.,  Vol.  4:468. 
Thomas,  Albert  Levi,  Vol.  4:588. 
Thomas,  Benjamin  F.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:439. 
Thomas,  Carrie  S.,  Vol.  4:199. 
Thomas,  Charles  J.,  Vol.  2:488*. 
Thomas,   Charles   W.,  Vol.  2:724*. 
Thomas,  Daniel  Francis,  Vol.  4:558. 
Thomas,  David  P.,  Vol.  4:442. 
Thomas,  Dorus  Adams,  Vol.  4:668. 
Thomas,  Edna  Harker,  Vol.  4:301*. 
Thomas,   Edward,   Vol.   2:721*. 
Thomas,  Elbert  Duncan,  Vol.  2:722*; 

Vol.  4:225*,  346. 
Thomas,  Eleanor  Bromley,  Vol.  4:302. 
Thomas,  Elijah,  jun.,  Vol.  4:620. 
Thomas,  Elijah  Murray,  Vol.  4:620. 
Thomas,  Elisha  John,  Vol.  4:400. 
Thomas,  Emanuel,  Vol.  4:417. 
Thomas,  James  Richard,  Vol.  4:514. 
Thomas,  Joseph  Francis,  Vol.  4:611. 
Thomas,  Kenneth  Albert,  Vol.  4:766. 
Thomas,  Lorenzo  R.,  Vol.  4:422. 
Thomas,   Marie   C,   Vol.  4:268. 
Thomas,   Martin  Adams,  Vol.   4:581. 
Thomas,  Richard  K.,  Vol.  1:780*. 
Thomas,  Robert  Henry,   Vol.  2:723*. 
Thomas,  Robert  T.,  Vol.  2:723'' ;  Vol. 

4:721. 
Thomas,  William  Henry,  Vol.  3:265*. 
Thomassen,  Charles  R.,  Vol.  3:539. 
Thomassen,   Peter   OlaflF,   Vol.   2:724*. 
Thompson,  see  Merrill,  Phoebe  L. 
Thompson,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:529. 
Thompson,  Janet  L.  M.,  Vol.  4:199. 
Thompson,  Joseph,  Vol.  3:266*. 
Thompson,  Mansel  Hardy,  Vol.  4:598. 
Thompson,  Mercy  R.  F.,  Vol.  2:725*. 
Thompson,   Nels   Albert,   Vol.   4:537. 


Thompson,  Niels,  Vol.  2:321*. 
Thompson,  Orvil  L.,  Vol.  3:540*. 
Thompson,  Robert  B.,  Vol.  1:253. 
Thompson,  Wm.  Orville,  Vol.  4:581. 
Thomson,  Andrew,  Vol.  2:549*. 
Thomson,   Andrew,   jun..   Vol.   2:726*. 
Thomson,  Andrew  W.,  Vol.  2:314*. 
Thomson,   Christiana   J.,   Vol.   2:549*. 
Thomson,  Daniel  Andrew,  Vol.  4:395. 
Thomson,  George,  Vol.   3:265*. 
Thomson,   William,  Vol.   4:668. 
Thoresen,  Ingwald  C,  Vol.  1:430*. 
Thorn,  William,  Vol.  1:610*. 
Thorne,   David   Benjamin,   Vol.   4:643. 
Thorne,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  1:512*. 
Thornell,    Jesse,    Vol.    4:553. 
Thornley,  John,  Vol.  3:267*. 
Thornley,    Martha    Seed,   Vol.   3:268*. 
Thornton,  Horace,  Vol.  4:721. 
Thorpe,  Christian   L.,  Vol.  3:540*. 
Thorpe,  Marcus  Ball,  Vol.  4:721. 
Thorup,  John  T.,  Vol.   1:595*. 
Thunnell,  Isaac  Peter,  Vol.  4:384*. 
Thurber,  Albert  D.,  Vol.  4:442,  501. 
Thurber,  Albert  K.,  Vol.  1:519. 
Thurman,  Ray  S.,  Vol.  3:268*,  511. 
Thurston,  Thomas  J.,  Vol.  3::^'*. 
Tietjen,  Alma,  Vol.  3:54^    . 
Tietjen,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  3:542*. 
Tiffany,  Asa  York,  Vol.  4:527. 
Tiffany,  Geo.  Mason,  Vol.  4:527. 
Tilley,   Alma    Charles,   Vol.   4:435. 
Tillotson,  Ephraim,  Vol.  2:15*. 
Timpanogos    Stake,    Vol.    4:642-644. 
Tingey,  Bertha  K.,  Vol.  4:268. 
Tingey,  Clarence  Home,  Vol.  4:311. 
Tingey,  Franklin  S.,  Vol.  1:650*. 
Tingey,  Henry,  Vol.  4:431. 
Tingey,  John,  Vol.   1:648*. 
Tingey,  Joseph   Stafford,  Vol.  4:73*. 
Tingey,   Martha  Jane    Home,   Vol.  4: 

74*,  269. 
Tingey,  Thomas,  jun..  Vol.   1:333. 
Tingey,   Thos,   J.,  jun..   Vol.   4:670. 
Tingey,  Wesley  Earl,  Vol.  3:727*. 
Tinsley,  Wm.  E.,  Vol.  4:435. 
Tintic  Stake,  Vol.  4:644-645. 
Tippets,  Brigham  L.,  jun..  Vol.  4:418. 
Tippets,    John    Harvey,    Vol.    3:269*; 

Vol.  4:721. 
Tippetts,  Harrison  P.,  Vol.  4:535. 
Tippetts,  Joseph  Alva,  Vol.  4:572. 
Tittensor,  John  Wm.,  Vol.  4:629. 
Tittensor,  Russell  E.,  Vol.  4:629. 
Tobiason,  Theodore,  Vol.  1:617*;  Vol. 

4:384*. 
Todd,  Douglas  M.,  Vol.  4:248. 
Todd,  Thos.   Richardson,   Vol.   4:591. 
Todd,  Wm.  Russell,  Vol.  4:591. 
Tolley,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:22,  727. 
Tolman,  Abinadi,  Vol.  4:431. 
Tolman,   Benjamin  H.,  Vol.  3:543*. 
Tolman,   Judson,   Vol.   2:78*. 
Tolman,  Judson  A.,  Vol.  1:388*. 
Tolman,  Judson  Isaac,  Veil.  4:650. 


INDEX 


819 


Tolton,  Edward,  Vol.  3:543*. 
Tolton,  John  Carlisle,  Vol.  4:411. 
Tolton,  John  Franklin,  Vol.  3:544*. 
Tomlinson,  Judson  Bliss,  Vol.  3:728. 
Tongan  Mission,  Vol.  4:389-390. 
Tooele  Stake,  Vol.  4:645-649. 
Toolson,  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:415. 
Toone,  Claudius  Conrad,  Vol.  4:75,  540. 
Toone,  Geo.  Ernest,  Vol.  4:76. 
Toone,  James  Melvin,  Vol.  4:540. 
Toone,  Wm.  Henry,  Vol.  4:540. 
Torgerson,  Gilbert,  Vol.  2:247. 
Towler,  Richard  C,  Vol.  4:445. 
Towler,  Thomas  E.,  Vol.  4:169,  480. 
Toyn,  David  Harry,  Vol.  3:270*. 
Toyn,  Thomas  S.,  Vol.  4:450. 
Tracy,  Eli  A.,  Vol.  2:346*. 
Trane,  Thomas  F.,  Vol.  1:506*. 
Transtrom,  Ola,  Vol.  3:270*. 
Trayner,  Jacob  Hampton,  Vol.  4:358*. 
Tribe,   Junius    Rallison,   Vol.   4:227*. 
Trimble,  Robinson  Chase,  Vol.  4:766. 
Tripp,  John  Leroy,  Vol.  3:728. 
Tucker,  Amasa,  Vol.  4:550. 
Tucker.  Charles,  Vol.  3:545*. 
Tucker,  Edward  C,  Vol.  2:293,  812*. 
Tuckett,  John,  Vol.  4:505. 
Tuddenham,  Alice  Calder,  Vol.  4:269. 
Tufts,  Josiah,  Vol.  2:269. 
Tullis,  John  Hardman,  Vol.  4:574. 
Turkish  Mission,  Vol.  4:390-391. 
Turley,  Isaac,  Vol.  4:501. 
Turley,  Marion  Wm.,  Vol.  4:527. 
Turner,   Amos    Howarth,   Vol.   4:445. 
Turner,  Charles,  Vol.  3:271. 
Turner,  James,  Vol.  1:589*. 
Turner,  James  F.,  Vol.   1:577*. 
Turner,  William  A.,  Vol.  2:230*. 
Turnquist,  Carl  Oscar,  Vol.  4:558. 
Turpin,  Jesse,  Vol.  3:728*. 
Tuttle,  Luther  Terry,  Vol.  3:729*. 
Tuttle,  Norton  Ray,  Vol.  4:648. 
Twede,  Herman,  Vol.  4:546. 
Twin   Falls   Stake,  Vol.   4:649-650. 
Twitchell,  Milton,  Vol.  4:475. 
Twitchell,  Willis,  Vol.  1:471*. 
Tyler,  Daniel,  Vol.  4:389,  766. 
Tyler,  Frank  Newton,  Vol.  3:546. 
Tyler,  Robert  M.,  Vol.    1:560. 
Tyler,  Wm.  Oscar,  Vol.  4:604. 
Tyson,  Emanuel,  Vol.  4:431. 

U 

Udall,  David  A.,  Vol.  2:112*. 
Udall,  David  K.,  Vol.   1:325*. 
Udall,   Jesse   Addison,   Vol.   4:604. 
Udall,  John  Hunt,  Vol.  4:527. 
Udall,  Levi  Stewart,  Vol.  4:598. 
Udy,  Charles  Albert,  Vol.  3:272*. 
Uintah  Stake,   Vol.  4:651-654. 
Unander,  Ralph  Peter,  Vol.  4:435. 
Union  Stake,  Vol.  4:654-656. 
Ure,  James  Wm.,  Vol.  4:543. 
Utah    Stake,   Vol.   4:656-659. 
Utley,  Ray,  Vol.  4:627. 


Valentine,  August,  Vol.  4:431. 
Valentine,   Henry   Wilson,  Vol.  4:611. 
Valentine,    Hyrum    W.,    Vol.    3:731*; 

Vol.  4:338*,  389. 
Valentine,  Nephi  James,  Vol.  4:431. 
Vance,  Byron  Alvin,  Vol.  4:550. 
Vance,  James  Wesley,  Vol.  3:273*. 
Vance,  Wm.   Perkins,  Vol.  4:721.  -^ 
Van    Cott,  Annie   A.,  Vol.   4:76*. 
Van  Cott,  John,  Vol.   1:198*;   Vol.  2: 

727;  Vol.  4:374*. 
Vanderwood,  see  Van  der  Woude. 
Van  der  Woude,  Anne   Wiegers,  Vol. 

4:358. 
Van  Dyk,  Sybren,  Vol.  4:358*. 
Van  Dyke,  Wm.  D.,  jun..  Vol.  4:558. 
Van  Noy,  Elsie  Hogan,  Vol.  4:269*. 
Van  Wagener,  David,  Vol.  4:661. 
Van  Wagoner,  John,  jun..  Vol.  -4:662. 
Varley,   William,   jun.,  Vol.  4:615. 
Vaughan,  John  Harris,  Vol.  2:728*. 
Vernon,  James,  Vol.  2:232*. 
Vetterli,  John,  Vol.  3:730*. 
Volker,  John  W.  F.,  Vol.  4:359*. 
Vorkink,  William,  Vol.  4:486. 
Vrasher,  Reuben,  Vol.  4:459. 

W 

Waddoups,  Eliza  J.  S.,  Vol.  3:275*. 
Waddoups,  Ezra,  Vol.  4:635. 
Waddoups,   Mark,   Vol.   4:342. 
Waddoups,  Martha  Page,  Vol.  3:274*. 
Waddoups,   William,   Vol.   3:274*. 
Waddoups,  Wm.  W.,  Vol.  4:450. 
Wade,  Chas.  Franklin,  Vol.  4:561, 
Wade,  Edward  D.,  Vol.  3:546. 
Wade,  Moses,  Vol.  3:547. 
Wagstaff,  Alma  W.,  Vol.  4:456. 
Wahlquist,  Anders  J.,  Vol.  2:104. 
Wahlquist,  Chas.  Fred.,  Vol.  4:591. 
Wahlquist,  Charles  J.,  Vol.  3:275*. 
Wahlquist,  John   T.,  Vol.   4:228*. 
Wahlquist,  Vera  E.  P.,  Vol.  4:302. 
Wainwright,    William,   Vol.   4:505. 
Waite,  John  A.,  jun.,  Vol.  3:276. 
Waite,  Wm.   L.,  Vol.  4:435. 
Wakefield,  Lansing  Ira,  Vol.  4:621. 
Wakley,  Willard,  Vol.  4:581. 
Wakley,  Wm.  Henry  H.,  Vol.  4:581. 
Wale,  Wm.  James,  Vol.  4:656. 
Walker,  Daniel  Cox,  Vol.  2:336. 
Walker,   Don   Carlos,   Vol.    1:453*. 
Walker,  Erastus,  Vol.  4:588. 
Walker,  Ezra  Brown,  Vol.  3:547. 
Walker,  Franklin,  Vol.  4:518. 
Walker,  Frederick   Wm.,  Vol.  4:558. 
Walker,  Henry,  Vol.  2:729*. 
Walker,  Henson,  Vol.  1:508*;  Vol.  4: 

721. 
Walker,  James  Henson  (Bp.  Pleasant 

Grove),  Vol.  4:170. 
Walker,     James     H.     (Bp.     Raymond 

Ward),  Vol.  4:359*,  636. 


820 


INDEX 


Walker,  James  John,  Vol.  3:547*. 
Walker,  James   Thomas,  Vol.  3:548*. 
Walker,  Jesse  M.,  Vol.  4:396. 
Walker,  John  Calvin,  Vol.  4:519. 
Walker,  John  H.,  Vol.  2:109*. 
Walker,  Joseph,  Vol.  4:171. 
Walker,  Solomon,  Vol.  3:549*. 
Walker,  Stephen,  Vol.  2:729*. 
Walker,  Thaddeus,  Vol.   3:732. 
Walker,  William  H.,  Vol.  1:565*. 
Wall,   Fredrick,   Vol.   4:654. 
Wall,  Lawrence  C,  Vol.  4:591. 
Wall,  Wm.  Madison,  Vol.  4:658. 
Wallace,  Anna  M.   Neve,  Vol.  4:303. 
Wallace,  Elen,  Vol.  4:270. 
Wallace,  George  B.,  Vol.  1:291*. 
Wallace,  George  E.,  Vol.  2:402*. 
Wallace,  Henry,  Vol.  1:613*. 
Wallantine,  Robert   W.,  Vol.  2:730. 
Wallis,  James  H.,  Vol.  4:654. 
Walser,   George  Jasper,  Vol.  3:549. 
Walser,  John  Jacob,  Vol.  4:501. 
Walsh,  John,  Vol.   2:81,   744*. 
Walters,  Henry  B.,  Vol.  3:550*. 
Walton,  James,  Vol.  4:77. 
Walton,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:730*. 
Walz,  Conrad,  Vol.  3:551. 
Wandell,  Charles  W.,  Vol.  3:551;  Vol. 

4:309. 
Wanner,  Serge  N.,  Vol.  4:766. 
Warburton,  Joseph,  Vol.   1:593*. 
Ward,  Asael  E.,  Vol.  4:584. 
Ward,   Clarence  Truelock,  Vol.   4:425. 
Ward,  David  Henry,  Vol.  2:270. 
Ward,    Elijah    Barney,   Vol.   3:552. 
Ward,  George  Moroni,  Vol.  3:554*. 
Ward,  Geo.  P.,  Vol.  4:496. 
Ward,  Geo.  Welton,  Vol.  4:431. 
Ward,  James,  Vol.  4:561. 
Ward,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  4:561. 
Ward,  Joseph   Frank,  Vol.  4:511. 
Ward,  Moroni,  Vol.    1:459*. 
Ward,    Richard   Alvin,   Vol.    3:554. 
Ward,  William  Ivan,  Vol.  3:732. 
Wardle,  Chas.   Meyers,  Vol.  4:642. 
Wardle,  George,  Vol.  4:722. 
Wardle,  Junius  F.,  Vol.  3:555. 
Wardsworth,   Wm.   Shin,   Vol.   4:722. 
Ware,  James  Russell,  Vol.  3:555*. 
Warner,  Alvin,  Vol.  3:556. 
Warner,   Elisha,  Vol.   4:570. 
Warner,  Homer  Candland,  Vol.  4:249. 
Warner,  William  H.,  Vol.  3:556*. 
Warner,  Wm.  LeRoy,  Vol.  4:612. 
Warnick,  Charles  P.,  Vol.  1:513*. 
Warnick,  Howard  Benj.,  Vol.  4:644. 
Warnick,  Wilford  W.,  Vol.  4:78*. 
Warren,  Louis  Albert,  Vol.  3:733. 
Wasatch    Stake,    Vol.    4:659-662. 
Wasden,    James    Brooks,    Vol.    3:276; 

Vol.  4:417. 
Waspe,  Ileen  Ann,  Vol.  4:270. 
Waters,  DeLoss  Clark,  Vol.  4:676. 
Waters,  Elmer  Evan,  Vol.  4:588. 
Waters,  Geo.  Arden,  Vol.  4:588. 


Waters,  Wm.  Birch,  Vol.  4:668. 
Watkins,  Arthur  Vivian,  Vol.  4:615. 
Watkins,  George  W.,  Vol.  3:557. 
Watkins,  John,  Vol.  4:662. 
Watkins,  Joseph  H.,  jun.,  Vol.  4:514. 
Watkins,  Wm.  Lampard,  Vol.  2:62*. 
Watson,  Andrew  A.,  Vol.  2:3*. 
Watson,  Edwin,  Vol.  4:422. 
Watson,   Ellen   Rilv,  Vol.   2:423*. 
Watson,    Hugh,    Vol.    2:428*. 
Watson,  James  Cowan,  Vol.  2:423*. 
Watson,  John,  Vol.  4:666. 
Watson,  Joseph  M.,  Vol.  3:277*. 
Watson,  Sarah  J.  W.,  Vol.  2:429*. 
Watt,  Golightly,  Vol.  3:278*. 
Watt,  J.  Ralph,  Vol.  4:766. 
Watt,  Richard  G..  Vol.  4:407. 
Watts,  Baldwin  H.,  Vol.  3:657. 
Wayment,  Alma  E.,  Vol.  4:531. 
Wayment,  Wm.  T.,  Vol.  4:558. 
Wayne    Stake,    Vol.    4:062-665. 
Webb,  Edward   Milo,  Vol.  4:578,  650. 
Webb,  Eli  J.,  Vol.  4:496. 
Webb,  Elvin,  Vol.  4:767. 
Webb,  Geo.  Edwin,  Vol.  4:582. 
Webb,  John  Edmund,  Vol.  4:591. 
Webb,  Vernal  Chas.,  Vol.  4:669. 
Webber,  Thomas  G.,  Vol.   1:670. 
Weber,  Robert,  Vol.  3:558. 
Weber  Stake,  Vol.  4:665-667. 
Webster,  Francis,  Vol.  2:533*. 
Webster,  Francis  P.  Urie,  Vol.  4:574. 
Webster,  George  William,  Vol.  3:558*. 
Webster,  John,  Vol.  2:475*. 
Webster,  John  J.  G.,  Vol.  3:559*. 
Webster,  John  W.,  Vol.  2:477. 
Webster,  Mary  A.  W.,  Vol.  2:476*. 
Webster,  William,  Vol.  3:559*. 
Webster,  Wm.  Frederick,  Vol.  4:664. 
Weech,  David  H.,  Vol.  4:604. 
Weed,  Charles  Leonard,  Vol.  4:78*. 
Weggeland,  Danquart  A.,  Vol.  2:271*. 
Weibye,  Jens  C.  A.,  Vol.  1:818*. 
Weiler,  Elijah  M.,  Vol.  1:003*. 
Weiler,  Jacob,  Vol.  1:601*;  Vol.  4:722. 
Weiler.  Joseph,  Vol.  4:359*. 
Weimer,  Silas  Sylvester,  Vol.  4:611. 
Welker,  Adam,  Vol.  2:199*. 
Welker,  Hugh  Melvin,  Vol.  3:733. 
Welker,  James    R.,   Vol.   2:200*. 
Welker,  John,  Vol.  4:604. 
Welker,  Rov   Anson,  Vol.  4:404. 
Welling,  Arthur.  Vol.  4:362,  511. 
Welling,  Geo.  Albert,  Vol.  4:622. 
Welling,  Job,  Vol.  4:309. 
Welling.  Joseph  Harriman,  Vol.  4:408. 
Welling,  Milton  H.,  Vol.   1:770. 
Wellington,   John,   Vol.   2:298*. 
Wells,  Daniel   II.,  Vol.    1:62*;    Vol.  4: 

320*. 
Wells,   Emmeline   B.   W..  Vol.  2:731*; 

Vol.  4:178*,  199*. 
Wells.  Heber  M.,  Vol.  1:722*. 
Wells,  John,  Vol.  3:791^'. 
Wells,  Joseph  Smith,  Vol.  2:479*. 
Wells,  Junius  F.,  Vol.  1:714;  Vol.  4:249. 


INDEX 


821 


Wells,  Louie,  Vol.  4:270. 
Wells,  Louis  R.,  Vol.  2:521*. 
Wells,  Lydia  Ann,  Vol.  2:511. 
Wells,  Margaret  Ann  N.,  Vol.  4:270. 
Wells,  Rulon  S.,  Vol.   1:212*;   Vol.   4: 

249,  320*. 
Wells,  Samuel  H.,  Vol.  3:278*. 
Wells,  Susan  H.  A.,  Vol.  2:511. 
Wells,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:463. 
Wells,  Thomas  Movell,  Vol.  4:463. 
Welsch,  Charles  A.,  Vol.  2:43. 
Wentz,  Peter  M.,  Vol.  2:734. 
Wessel,  Elva  Moss,  Vol.  4:270. 
West,  Chauncey  W.,  Vol.  1:749*. 
West,  Erastus,  Vol.  4:518. 
West,  Franklin  L.,  Vol.  4:249*. 
West,  Jabez  W.,  Vol.  1:616*. 
West,  John  Anderson,  Vol.  3:279*. 
West,  Joseph  Anderson,  Vol.  4:516. 
West,  Joseph  Alva,  Vol.  1:754*. 
West,  Josephine  Richards,  Vol.  4:303*. 
West,  William,  Vol.  2:735. 
West  Jordan  Stake,  Vol.  4:667-669. 
Westerberg,  Alfred  Erick,  Vol.  4:565. 
Westerberg,  Carl  G.,  Vol.  4:588. 
Westerberg,  Chas.  Axel,  Vol.  4:565. 
Westerberg,  Edgar  Olaf,  Vol.  4:642. 
Western  States  Mission,  Vol.  4:391. 
Weston,  Samuel,  Vol.  4:404. 
Westover,  John  Lycurgus,  Vol.  4:621. 
Westover.  Lewis  Esper,  Vol.  4:486. 
Wheatley,  Thomas,  jun..  Vol.   2:735*. 
Wheeler,  Jesse  Hyrum,  Vol.  4:446. 
Wheeler,  John,  Vol.  4:722. 

Wheeler,  Joseph  Edward,  Vol.  2:204. 
Wheeler,  Thos.  Mark,  Vol.  4:478. 

Wheelock,   Cyrus   H.,   Vol.   4:363. 

Wheelon,  Ruth  Agnes,  Vol.  4:228*. 

Wheelwright,  D.   Sterling,  Vol.  4:250. 

Wheelwright,  Thomas  B.,  Vol.  3:560. 

Whetten,  Clifford  Leon,  Vol.  4:501. 

Whetten,  James  Elbert,  Vol.  4:501. 

Whetten,  John  Thomas,  Vol.  4:501. 

Whipple,  Edson,  Vol.  3:560;  Vol.  4:722. 

Whipple,  Robert  John,  Vol.  3:733*. 

Whipple,  Willard,  Vol.  2:218. 

Whitaker,  John  M.,  Vol.  1:790*. 

Whitaker,  Wm.  Porter,  Vol.  4:578. 

White,  Barnard,  Vol.  4:558. 

White,  Catherine  Foutz,  Vol.  2:736. 

White,  Charles  D.,  Vol.  1:531*. 

White,  Chas.  Dennis,  jun..  Vol.  4:411. 

White,  Edward,  Vol.  3:562*. 

White,  Ephraim,  Vol.  4:431. 

White,  John  McArthur,  Vol.  4:676. 

White,  Joseph  Barnard,  Vol.  4:490. 

White,  Kershaw  N.,  Vol.  2:436*. 

White,  Levi  Chas.,  Vol.  4:456,  664. 

White,  Lizzie  Borgeson,  Vol.  4:171*. 

White,  Samuel  Orson,  jun..  Vol.  4:411. 

Whitear,   Eli,   Vol.   4:541. 

Whitehead,  Adolphus  Renie,  jun.,  Vol. 
4:547. 

Whitehead,  Joseph  Samuel,  Vol.  4:612. 

Whitehead,  Peter  Green,  Vol.  4:468. 

Whitehead,  Walter  P.,  Vol.  4:659. 


Whitehead,  Wm.  J.,  Vol.  4:507. 
Whiting,  Charles,  sen.,  Vol.  4:501. 
Whiting,  Chas.,  jun..  Vol.  4:598. 
Whiting,  Edward  L.,  Vol.  2:273*. 
Whiting,  Francis  M.,  Vol.  3:563. 
Whiting,  Lorenzo  Snow,  Vol.  4:579. 
Whiting,  Lucius  Burr,  Vol.  4:518. 
Whitlock,  Chas.  Clyde,  Vol.  4:482. 
Whitlock,  Royal,  Vol.  4:482. 
Whitmer,  Christian,  Vol.  1:276. 
Whitmer,    David,    Vol.    1:263*. 
Whitmer,  Jacob,  Vol.  1:276. 
Whitmer,  John,  Vol.   1:251. 
Whitmer,  Mary  M.,  Vol.  1:283. 
Whitmer,  Peter,  Vol.  1:282. 
Whitmer,  Peter,  jun..  Vol.  1:277. 
Whitney,  Elizabeth  A.,  Vol.  3:563;  Vol. 

4:200. 
Whitney,  Geo.  Luke,  Vol.  4:532. 
Whitney,  Horace  Kimball,  Vol.  4:722. 
Whitney,  Ira  B.,  Vol.  2:206. 
Whitney,  Newel  K.,  Vol.  1:222*. 
Whitney,  Orson  F.,  Vol.  1:658*;  Vol.  3: 

793;  Vol.  4:321*. 
Whitney,  Orson  K.,  Vol.  4:723. 
Whitney,  Rebecca  Nibley,  Vol.  4:303. 
Whittaker,  James  L.,  Vol.  4:475. 
Whittier,  Eli  Frank,  Vol.  3:562. 
Whittier,  Herbert  J.,  Vol.  4:541. 
Whittier,  Raymond,  Vol.  4:435. 

Whitworth,  Michael  W.,  Vol.  3:280*. 
Wickel,  Richard,  jun..  Vol.  4:635. 

Wickman,  Hans  C,  Vol.  2:94. 
Widerborg,  Carl,  Vol.  1:814*;  Vol.  4: 
375*. 

Widtsoe,  Anna  Karine   Gaarden,   Vol. 
3:734*. 

Widtsoe,  John  A.,  Vol.  1:768*;  Vol.  3: 
735;  Vol.  4:250,  321*,  686. 

Widtsoe,   Osborne  J.   P.,  Vol.   2:403*; 
4:250. 

Wight,  Almon  Nelson,  Vol.  4:408. 

Wight,  Lyman,  Vol.  1:93;  Vol.  4:333. 

Wight,  Stephen,  Vol.  4:523. 

Wight,  Thaddeus,  Vol.  4:432. 

Wilcken,  August  H.  F.,  Vol.  4:348. 

Wilcken,  Geo.  Q.,  Vol.  4:453. 

Wilcox,   EHzabeth  J.   S.,  Vol.  2:737*; 
Vol.  4:200. 

Wilcox,  Samuel  Allen,  Vol.  4:535. 

Wilde,  Abraham  Marsh,  Vol.  4:636. 

Wilde,  Adelbert  Earl,  Vol.  4:670. 

Wilde,  Albert  Alanson,  Vol.  4:426. 

Wilde,  Geo.  Fredrick,  Vol.  4:670. 

Wilde,  John  Frederick,  Vol.  4:635. 

Wilde,  Stirling  Floyd,  Vol.  4:636. 

Wilde,  Willard  Heber,  Vol.  4:635. 

Wilde,  William  S.,  Vol.  4:635. 

Wilding,  Thomas  E.,  Vol.  2:434*. 

Wilhelmsen,  Benj.  Everett,  Vol.  3:565*. 

Wilhelmsen.  Niels,  Vol.  3:564*;  Vol.  4: 
375. 

Wilkes,  Albert  Lester,  Vol.  3:566*. 

Wilkins,  Etson  Buriah,  Vol.  4:650. 

Wilkins,  Geo.   E..  Vol.  4:654. 

Wilkins,  George  W.,  Vol.  2:161*. 


822 


INDEX 


Wilkins,  Joseph  David,  Vol.  4:604. 
Wilkins,  Orson,  Vol.  4:598. 
Wilkins,  Oscar,  Vol.  2:738*;  Vol.  4:456. 
Wilkins,  Reuben  Ralph,  Vol.  4:457. 
Willard,  James  Joseph,  Vol.  4:676. 
Willardsen,  Albertus,  Vol.  4:483. 
Willardsen,  Anna  K.  S.,  Vol.  2:547*. 
Willardsen,  Christian,  Vol.  2:545*. 
Willardsen,    Christian,    jun..    Vol.    2: 

547*. 
Willardsen,  Karen  S.,  Vol.  2:546*. 
Willardsen,  Mary  L.,  Vol.  2:546*. 
Willardsen,  Willard  F.,  Vol.  4:483. 
Wilks,  Ira  Jones,  Vol.  4:767. 
Willes,  Wm.  Sidney  Smith,  Vol.  3:566. 
Willey,  David  0.,  jun..  Vol.  2:738. 
Williams,  Ada  Evans,  Vol.  3:281*. 
Williams,  Alma,  Vol.  4:496. 
Williams,  Almon  M.,  Vol.  4:723. 
Williams,  Christopher,  Vol.  4:511. 
Williams,  Clarissa  S.,  Vol.  2:738*;  Vol. 

4:178*,  200*. 
Williams,  David,  Vol.  2:532*. 
Williams,  David  J.  (of  Provo),  Vol.  1: 

493. 
Williams,  David  J.  (of  Salt  Lake  Citv), 

Vol.  2:536*. 
Williams,     David    James     (Greenville 

Ward),  Vol.  3:568*. 
Williams,  Ebenezer  A.,  Vol.  3:280*. 
Williams,  Eda  Pearson,  Vol.  2:741*. 
Williams,  Frederick  G.,  Vol.  1:51. 
Williams,  Geo.  Calvin,  Vol.  4:598. 
Williams,  Geo.  R.,  Vol.  4:411. 
Williams,  George  W.,  jun..  Vol.  2:740*. 
Williams,  Griffith  E.,  Vol.  3:736. 
Williams,  Gustavus,  Vol.  4:664. 
Williams,  Helen  Spencer,  Vol.  4:271. 
Williams,  Ira  T.,  Vol.  2:106*. 
Williams,  James  H.,  Vol.  4:523. 
Williams,  James  L.,  Vol.  4:565. 
Williams,  James  V.  N.,  Vol.  2:740*. 
Williams,  John  T.,  Vol.  4:728. 
Williams,  Jos.  Elmer,  Vol.  4:422. 
Williams,  Leo  Daniels,  Vol.  4:523. 
Williams,  Orlando  C,  Vol.  4:621. 
Williams,  Peter  Joan,  Vol.  4:422. 
Williams,  Robert  Hanna,  Vol.  4:400. 
Williams,  Sarah  T.,  Vol.  2:534*. 
Williams,  T.  Frank,  Vol.  4:250. 
Williams,  Thomas  Allen,  Vol.  4:79*. 
Williams,  Wells  Allison,  Vol.  4:574. 
Williams,  William  N.,  Vol.  1:657*. 
Williams,    Wm.    W.    (Mound    Valley), 

Vol.  4:400. 
Williams,  Wm.  W.  (Samaria),  Vol.  4: 

523. 
Willie,  Allen  Leroy,  Vol.  4:490. 
Willie,  James  G.,  Vol.  2:430. 
Willis,  Geo.  H.,  Vol.  4:687. 
Willis,  John  H.,  Vol.  2:219*. 
Willis,  John  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:621. 
Willis,  John  Wm.,  Vol.  4:572. 
Willis,  Lemuel  J.,  Vol.  2:46*. 
Willis,  Wm.  P.,  Vol.  4:572. 


Willis,  William  W.,  Vol.  2:218*. 
Wilson,  Alfred  R.,  Vol.  4:546. 
Wilson,  Benj.  Franklin,  Vol.  4:442. 
Wilson,  David  John,  Vol.  4:543. 
Wilson,  Geo.  Albert,  sen.,  Vol.  4:80. 
Wilson,  George  D.,  Vol.  3:282*. 
Wilson,  Guy  Carlton,  Vol.  3:736*. 
Wilson,  Heber  James,  Vol.  4:665. 
Wilson,  James  Henry,  Vol.  4:676. 
Wilson,  Joseph  E.,  Vol.  1:412. 
Wilson,  Joseph  Ellis,  jun..  Vol.  4:493. 
Wilson,  Marion  Lyman,  Vol  4:501. 
Wilson,  Moroni,  Vol.  3:282*. 
Wilson,  Morris,  jun..  Vol.  4:680. 
Wilson,  Robert  L.  (Oakley),  Vol.  2:741. 
Wilson,  Robert  Lorenzo  (Payson),  Vol. 

4:546. 
Wilson,  William  W.,  Vol.  1:586*. 
Wiltbank,  Ellis  W.,  Vol.  1:555*. 
Winchester,  Benjamin,  Vol.  4:692. 
Winchester,  Stephen,  Vol.  4:692. 
Winder,  John  R.,  Vol.  1:244*;  Vol.  3: 

795;  Vol.  4:251. 
Winder,  Maria  Burnham,  Vol.  4:304. 
Winegar,  Thos.  Edwin,  Vol.  4:622. 
Winegar,  William  W.,  Vol.  3:283*. 
Winegar,  Willis  Leroy,  Vol.  4:642. 
Winn,  Dennis  Wilson,  Vol.  4:767. 
Winn,  William  Lucelus,  Vol.  3:568*. 
Winsor,  Andrew  Nielsen,  Vol.  3:570. 
Winsor,  Anson  Perry,  Vol.  3:569*. 
Winter,  Thomas  W.,  Vol.   1:606*. 
Winter,  Timothy  J.,  Vol.  4:473. 
Winters,  Hiram,  Vol.  4:692. 
Winters,  Niels  Erastus,  Vol.  4:418. 
Winterton,  Harold  Vernon,  Vol.  4:635. 
Wintle,  Geo.  Barlow,  Vol.  4:422. 
Wirthlin,  Jos.  L.,  Vol.  4:511. 
Wiser,  Wm.  Harvey,  Vol.  4:468. 
Witbeck,  Inez,  Vol.  4:229. 
Wittwer,  William,  Vol.  4:533. 
Wolcott,  Robert  W.,  Vol.  3:737. 
Wolstenholme,  Levi,  Vol.  2:450*. 
Wx)lstenholme,  Martha  H.,  Vol.  2:450*. 
Wood,  Alan  Gentry,  Vol.  4:478. 
Wood,  Charles,  Vol.  2:340*. 
Wood,  Charles  S.  (Provo),  Vol.  2:340*. 
Wood,    Chas.    Samuel    (View    Ward). 

Vol.  4:435. 
Wood,  Daniel  Thos.,  Vol.  4:630. 
Wood,  Don  Carlos,  Vol.  4:251. 
Wood,  Edward  Glen,  Vol.  4:395. 
Wood,  Edward  James,  Vol.  4:111,  367. 
Wood,  Franklin  Bryner,  Vol.  4:574.    ' 
Wood,  George  William,  Vol.  3:738. 
Wood,  James  Grace,  Vol.  2:91*,  805. 
Wood,  John,  jun..  Vol.  2:192. 
Wood,  John  Karl,  Vol.  4:514. 
Wood,  Jonathan  David,  Vol.  2:87*. 
Wood,  Jos.  Henry,  Vol.  4:609. 
Wood,  Martin,  Vol.  3:738. 
Wood,  Roy,  Vol.  4:650. 
Wood,  Samuel,  Vol.  2:741*. 
Wood,  Walter  John,  Vol.  4:642. 
Wood,  William,  Vol.  4:767. 


INDEX 


823 


Wood,  William,  jun.,  Vol.  2:408*. 
Woodard,  Jabez,  Vol.   3:571. 
Woodbury,  Angus  C,  Vol.  4:435. 
Woodbury,  John  Taylor,  Vol.  2:742. 
Woodbury,  Frank  B.,  Vol.  2:433*. 
Woodbury,  Orin  Nelson,  Vol.  2:432*. 
Woodland,  Daniel  P.,  Vol.  4:523. 
Woodland,  Henry  S.,  Vol.  1:315*. 
Woodland,  James,  Vol.  2:742. 
Woodmansee,  Charles  R.,  Vol.  3:738. 
Woodruff,   Abraham   O.,   Vol.   1:172*; 

Vol.  3:796;  Vol.  4:251. 
Woodruff,   Asahel    Hart,   Vol.   3:284*; 

Vol.  4:363. 
Woodruff,  David  P.,  Vol.  2:742. 
Woodruff,    Elias    Smith,   Vol.    2:367*; 

Vol.  4:391. 
Woodruff,  Emma  S.,  Vol.  2:805*;  Vol. 

4:201. 
Woodruff,  Helen  Winters,  Vol.  4:271. 
Woodruff,  Newton,  Vol.  1:402*. 
Woodruff,  Wilford,  Vol.  1:20*;  Vol.  4: 

251,  321*,  334*,  723. 
Woodruff,  Wilford,  jun.,  Vol.  1:616*. 
Woodruff,  Wilford  Owen,  Vol.  4:251. 
Woodruff  Stake,  Vol.  4:669-671. 
Woodward,  Cecil,  Vol.  4:468. 
Woodward,  George,  Vol.  4:724. 
Woodward,  Jabez,  Vol.  4:345,  347,  389. 
Woolf,  Golden  L.,  Vol.  4:336. 
Woolf,  John  Anthony  (Cardston,  Can- 
ada), Vol.  2:17. 
Woolf,  John  A.,  (Ucon  Ward),  Vol.  4: 

496. 
Woolley,  Albaroni  H.,  Vol.  2:281*. 
Woolley,  Edward  D.,  Vol.  1:358*. 
Woolley,  Edwin  D.,  Vol.  1:799*. 
Woolley,  Edwin  G.,  Vol.  1:799*. 
Woolley,  FJorence  L.  L.,  Vol.  4:304. 
Woolley,  Henry,  Vol.  3:284*. 
Woolley,  Hugh  Roberts,  Vol.  3:739*. 
Woolley,  John  Ensign,  Vol.  3:286*. 
Woolley,  John  M.,  Vol.  1:782. 
Woolley,  John  W.,  Vol.  3:285*. 
Woolley,  Marcellus  S.,  Vol.  1:679*. 
Woolley,  Marion  W.,  Vol.  4:768. 
Woolley,  Mary  Stretton  Blood,  Vol.  3: 

285*. 
Woolley,  Ralph  Edwin,  Vol.  4:173*. 
Woolley,  Ranald  Mills,  Vol.  4:567. 
Woolley,  Samuel  A.,  Vol.  1:781*. 
Woolley,  Samuel  Edwin,  Vol.  4:342. 
Woolley,  Thomas,  Vol.  2:743. 
Woolsey,  Thomas,  Vol.  4:723,  768. 
Woolstenhulme,  J.,  sen.,  Vol.  1:469*. 
Wootton,  Attewall,  Vol.  2:14. 
Wootton,  Charles  R.,  Vol.  2:294*. 
Wootton,  Geo.  A.,  Vol.  4:439. 
Wootton,  Vincent  F.,  Vol.  4:496. 
Wootton,  Wm.  Chas.,  Vol.  4:458. 
Workman,  Abram  Smith,  Vol.  4:572. 
Workman,  Andrew  J.,  Vol.  1:538. 
Worley,  William,  Vol.  4:514. 
Worsencroft,  Wm.  Lorenzo,  Vol.  4:368. 
Worthen,  Charles  H.,  Vol.  2:417*. 


Worthington,  Sam.  Wilson,  Vol.  4:426. 
Wotherspoon,  James,  Vol.  3:740*. 
Wrathall,  James  Leishman,  Vol.  4:648. 
Wray,  James  Enos,  Vol.  4:650. 
Wride,  Evan,  Vol.  4:659. 
Wride,  Geo.  T.,  Vol.  4:516. 
Wright,  Alexander,  Vol.  3:571. 
Wright,  Amos  R.,  Vol.  4:535. 
Wright,  Angus  Taylor,  Vol.  4:809. 
Wright,  Brigham,  Vol.  2:66*. 
Wright,  Chas.  Henry,  Vol.  4:671. 
Wright,  Edgar  M.,  Vol.  4:435. 
Wright,  Elias  Smith,  Vol.  4:113*. 
Wright,  Ernest,  Vol.  4:368. 
Wright,  Ernest  James,  Vol.  3:741. 
Wright,  Hugh  Alex.,  Vol.  4:473, 
Wright,  James  A.,  Vol.  2:291*. 
Wright,  John  F.,  Vol.  1:431*. 
Wright,  Jonathan  C,  Vol.  3:287. 
Wright,  Joseph,  Vol.  1:467. 
Wright,  Joseph  Brigham,  Vol.  4:459. 
Wright,  Lehi,  Vol.  4:174*. 
Wright,  Moses  J.,  Vol.  4:496. 
Wright,  Silas  L.,  Vol.  4:535. 
Wright,  William  H.,  Vol.  2:467*. 
Wriston  (Clifford),  John  Price,  Vol.  4: 
768. 


Yancey,  Adam,  Vol.  4:422. 
Yancey,  Wm.  Elvie,  Vol.  4:426. 
Yates,  Henry,  Vol.  4:432. 
Yates,  James  Maxwell,  Vol.  3:573*. 
Yates,  Thomas  (Scipio  Ward),  Vol.  3: 

574*. 
Yates,  Thomas    (Harper  Ward),  Vol. 

4:432. 
Yates,  Wm.  Geo.,  Vol.  4:649. 
Yearsley,  Nathan  David,  Vol.  4:523. 
Yeates,  Alma,  Vol.  4:490. 
Yeates,  Richard,  Vol.  1:421*. 
Yellowstone  Stake,  Vol.  4:671-676. 
Yost,  Fred,  Vol.  4:174*. 
Youd,  John  Pickles,  Vol.  3:575*. 
Youkstetter,  Wilhelm  G.,  Vol.  4:516. 
Young,  Afton,  Vol.  4:304*. 
Young,  Andrew,  Vol.  2:92*. 
Young,  Archibald  Graham,  Vol.  4:612, 
Young,  B.  Morris,  Vol.  4:251. 
Young,  B.  Spencer,  Vol.  4:251. 
Young,  Brigham,  Vol.  1:8*;  Vol.  4:321, 

724. 
Young,    Brigham,    jun..    Vol.    1:121*; 

Vol.  4:322*. 
Young,  Brigham  S.,  Vol.  4:364,  728, 
Young,  Brigham  W.,  Vol.  3:741. 
Young,  Charles,  Vol.  4:676. 
Young,  Clara  Decker,  Vol.  3:804;  Vol. 

4:724. 
Young,  Clifford  Earle,  Vol.  4:396. 
Young,  Don  Carlos,  jun..  Vol.  4:446. 
Young,  Ebenezer  R.,  Vol.  2:743*, 
Young,   Emmeline   McMaster,  Vol,  4: 

304. 


824 


INDEX 


Young, 
Young, 
Young 

635. 
Young, 

743; 
Young, 
Young, 
Young, 
Young, 
Young, 
Young, 

4:251 
Young, 
Young, 
Young, 
Young, 
Young, 
Young, 

4:251 
Young, 


Feramorz  Little,  Vol.  3:742. 
Franklin  W.,  Vol.  2:95*. 
(Jonge),   Hans   Olaus,  Vol.  4: 

Harriet  Page  Wheeler,  Vol.  3: 
Vol.  4:724. 

John  Ray,  Vol.  2:274*. 

John  W.,  Vol.  1:42. 

Joseph,  Vol.  1:187;  Vol.  4:324. 

Joseph  A.,  Vol.  1:518*. 
Joseph  Watson,  Vol.  4:546. 

Levi  Edgar,  Vol.  3:798*;  Vol. 
,  385. 

Lorenzo  Dow,  Vol.  4:724. 

Lorenzo  S.,  Vol.  3:575. 

Lorenzo  Zobieski,  Vol.  4:725. 

Parley  Absalom,  Vol.  4:671. 

Phineas  H.,  Vol.  4:511,  725. 

Richard  W.,  Vol.  1:671*;  Vol. 

Robert  D.,  Vol.  2:743*. 


Young,  Seymour  B.,  Vol.  1:200*. 
Young,  Walter  Ernest,  Vol.  4:501. 
Young,  Willard,  Vol.  3:575*. 
Young,  Wm.  Goodall,  Vol.  4:446. 
Young,  Zina  D.  H.,  Vol.  1:697*;  Vol 

4:178*,  201*. 
Youngberg,  Carl  G.,  Vol.  2:258*. 
Y.  L.  M.  L  A.,  Vol.  4:252-271. 
Y.  M.  M.  I.  A.,  Vol.  4:229-252. 
Young  Stake,  Vol.  4:676-677. 
Y.  W.  M.  L  A.,  Vol.  4:252-271. 


Zabriske,  Geo.  Albert,  Vol.  4:397. 
Zion  Park  Stake,  Vol.  4:678-680. 
Zion's  Camp,  Vol.  4:687-692. 
Zollinger,  Aaron  Arthur,  Vol.  4:584. 
Zufelt,  Geo.  Henry,  Vol.  4:677. 
Zundel,  Isaac  David,  Vol.  4:523. 
Zundell,  Abraham,  Vol.  3:288*. 
Zundell,  Isaac  E.  D.,  Vol.  1:561*. 


3  1197  21951  2420 


Date  Due 

All  library  items  are  subject  to  recall  at  any  time. 


MAR  1  T  ?nn 

1 

I^WR  i  J   /(JU 

l 

\tk^  -^  ^  ?ffli 

1 

At'K  i  b  100 

] 

Brigham  Young  University 


,j-;^i.j;u.   'w 


^5' 


':t0M'-^ 


■  ■'■■•■■'V'.'-J' 


1 

r 

>|^HH 

1^ ' 

1 

^ 

'IH^BBBB 

mm 

i^^^H^H 

P  / 

J 

r 

t^HH 

.   '    ,  w.-:;  ■■■■I.'  ^''•!.-' ->,';;.'(    '  .\}: 

iliii 

■.  •■ ,  *■  •  ,■  ■  ■  '"'i 


.'■.■:U' ''';,;;*»: 


-r-i:?n\ 


ft^ 


